THE MORGAN
SOIL TESTING SYSTEM
H. A. LUNT
H. G. M. JACOBSON
Cc. L. W. SWANSON
\
y i

F =

. )
Bulletin 541, May 1950 Reprinted April, 1958

THE CONNECTICUT AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION @ NEW HAVEN

THE MORGAN
‘
SOIL TESTING SYSTEM
HLA. LUNT
H. G. M. JACOBSON
Cc. L. W. SWANSON
\
7 ‘“\
6
.
: Bulletin 541, May 1950 Reprinted April, 1958
THE CONNECTICUT AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION @® NEW HAVEN

CONTENTS
PAGE
ORE WORD: :njsicoa/s)sl o'dc b.0 4 0 loilarasal 6 dep isco 6 rarest eR S04 6 MenmceUETME AS Krae'w Me aseTTae as Siejonerskefoig. v6 5
Tue Sort SARERE. byceccn cess weeieng tee eee aocthery4 ¢ soa RENO sola abutei gece ~ T
SAMMI 5, 5 a dusstngese-yeneyayaln ain, « ususadaen Sr iinehoumat a laress « » orqgihie sacle te eu ae Ene” tall
Soil. Sampling; AMstructiOns: .. .rgesingt csiwd taimore v « < siiieip wlelntors) Siaveisyeobekssensvein.s e'eng! ome
Preparation for Mailing: 24 + ssisosiiss sas siswiiore ed c4 ae enaricdens saumernccnsas, 98
Supplementary Information: .oc%. 0. sccscesceessemiiaedwed babaeaeeedesioes 9 8
Dime: of Sampling: esses: e-cagarischcmuemnasridn vhs Mang aed o Veeeaimeais omnes HS
Preparing the Soil Sample for Testing «:aisscccssiscwemmcdeassenmevedccenss 9
SOUT) TE RAGIE: ; yave- ssa aiblacnncaisieyn s-0/0un wrsiarass.¢,« 99633 Reetnee CEE ew eemeeaNeadeen Ol
EsTiMaTION OF Sort OrGANIC MATTER CONTENT ......... 0002 eee eee eee eeeeees 10
Sow Reaction’ (pH)> Tests) coef cca caanas ster einewn bi eiseesoewneccusy eae 12
Procedure With Glass Electrode pH Meter .................0eteeeeeeeeeeee 12
Colorimetric: Method lors pH cite ceiirtepeie oc vaaaerreeenlele gern Save eilwiaie wales animist: ing
Determining’ pH? With Single Dyes). jyciiets ss ca. sewn seas cemeteries ses ewer 12
Determining pH With ‘Wide-Range Dyes: .....6.ciiiati bs cesisstnccieesmn, 18
DETAILED DescripTION OF THE Morcan Sort TestinG SysSTEM ................ 13
The Morgan: Extracting Solution ssijiys:s secdicre ooscreiaie os 6s00 wiatiiere oo oreivie siavoreipiiiens A
Preparation of the Extracting Solution ..............sseeccseeceecceeseees 1S
AS ere reall ieee aera Peter: = <Te -e. ses 6 exaust taneden a cae ae dss sexelione'S alte & agayatianén a, asdica urs fet
RCTUIN PIER se tetas gah cetera a 8 Rtaesca teas dt avga pelea sis arog ow wig aenatitonm a eyes neni AS ¢
Whe Soil -xtraction = 3426's. ¢ ja eusn dees by ss as 4 eer g yas a ee awiedined ge es Teawietine AO
Simple Eercolatior? TXtractith: aceseca. 2 sye'ave b anaksraigho oe ss eivierewies divi. oceiserremadieate SLO
ILETTAbe ECXCEACHOD: fl ig o<-<veveipaptt ins on itpnd Uperdawree i-t0 anbie sixepayand, Sree Seige ancgegareteme: AE
‘Alternate. "Esxtraction, TL. 553 sasuveascns 4 Sewers 22d ds anne oae' neces’ amy UO
Lighting Conditions in Conducting the Tests ...............eeeeeeceeeeeees 18
Special Precautions .........sccseeseeee genes eteeseceenesetscsrecsvessees 18
Tests Most ComMMONLyY USep IN ROUTINE TESTING .......0ccceccsecccevccees 18
Nitrate: Nitrogen) o.sccicie. 0.00 eiiesesaierse op oie aiossigiel & adie 4's Midlasejoess. & eip nt RRR een
Brucine Method osiiic cs ae canen et 00040 anes oo ese dinieiw!s od » ase nme are ere
Diphenylamine Method) 2:04 ss005 somes see essesenaerieee emp eeae 19)
Aiitionia” Nitrogen ace 65s chasm sea nies inteatne & as oe sietateeee serous eemaerce ties 220
Phosphorus: <viscsc eraidatiivdea 0 0 Reverand x drue-n 6 dyey avageladabele cen aneketasamndaless (cele ee tesqeteeaaecense £720)
POtasslum “6s 5 ssw w waiscawvas ¢ ve dig lerersima’s aoe ner aibberels o bateneanlerMae lalate. austen nits, “oe
GCRICIUM, cicuuisicres scan ioninw se «alder ed aaa patently, Seco e ekieeeeeer a
INE ASTROSUUTEL: scacsstrd «vs xe fxsnvennosni Pale im tlevaya tena neamnenae aint es seid phaver teens, ploair Sreiescte/o- vig/ shel a
MTANGANESE ..0i0, 0s « 5 siniccaqeitiese. 1 ine RAMA ey oo ba cee ny aleewogeitiges sane “Se
PECTAL CHEMICAL £ RESTS) Gl: 55 ..cGatRi ee re eae eats eseom Bae. we
BPPEYED. a2 cise dec Waa Seva: 5 At oR CATT Scare REED eS MRC Br eh MEMS <P osre ae nietoiene Weel ee ale ee
MeV Ce GOULET ative cizpetclel esp bce pine Me Nieiarean hts alanis i legekslerhr el 0d #oé\s a sictepere a ela wieemilgnamee: eD
BNitcite. NittOReD ioasa'- ae cemctomicticcn oe ove a sambeisieles Las os SRNGIne nee baa s ewTeO
BSCR UIT A Mee os 2s, co. sey szeRte ts cena ae rap aaNet SHEE it yce/GHENoy VERO win ss s'sh extra nia ta ghtay glia) 'a's ARGH sapere” “HOO
TOTTOTIGIE: sss adi puree Aso Gite Sante kee’ aivtay a. capi tenaPeraNeSeS RIES Mansa, tue 6 earivarina a wieatwttenerehe ae
mlternate Lest, for “GMIOriGes (hei vis G2b% vesecme ste e set eeinewe cet hig «ethwigre Ee
CEA Cote pee ea ODL a Oe! ee er ee ey wee ee
PBT oir hd, PLE ates ara pres <% cs al Hse Neo marinOlE LON edecnentin pee

Copper sian ii aitteretstnicta's 4.0 ciattinis stare Misa atone nies Gre eee ee eae aa
Alternaté ‘Test. for Copper’ :c-s:eisievece +s osan cee Oa soe oe ee ae AE
Mercury c's oscivicin sniesia:sieiasd so <'s's 0 o.uisinieiareia 6 o'e oly Gets aiale 2 ote ae
LAG) op aie oe sie tessiveieiec's ve so b.0,clasiaisiane ss cies cislesinesl «ieee aa 4
ALSOTIG 0:0 sheterctainie cia'e's's oie'e oie wiscera'si0iciave ies uo orereraterstelsiaTe ek eels arene nen ee
Moly ben ua ose< (gi oye:0)er0's wiejain's sin's.o 6 65 cles vioinsein.e sed 6 ayetarercietd CERT ee nann
ADAPTATION Or THE Morcan Tests To Piant Tissue TESTING ................ 33 :
SMAMIUIG Fer oici0ic 010 0. blerwlepsialarofare’s x « « wea Biececaterauarative Sha aintero teete oe Sareea
Rapid: Field Tests (chiefly, qualitative): oescssiséve<ucecessccecedbsctmecss teemeee
ING Yatee ye ohio sche isretcisiolsteisicic: « wa-vinveibiacdvhyorece, « Salome ealitcemeinclet tee ee
PP ROSDNOPUB!  sercyerste ieee « wie » « o's's Siiratararavers ois te saree gb Ode PAR oe Ca
POtassUMn: 2 i.ccwamprctateicdss soca scotmemiy er oe outers de vaste ae oe ee
Mea rncar Ue Sos Se asc serascuetentgS19:6 55.5 sleIolonnsere ec © cch:t ee w.areccracavevetttans’ Seine ere ae
Semi-quantitative: Rapid. Tissue ‘Tests. «oss ssswejes es sitsteemacss vewececeecee 036
Quantitative: Tissue, Tests). |e <i x 218m) 4425.5 oS 0.5 onscinpaie' = aiaivrs Aospororviens 6 ¥0,04 waaote 36
Preparation a0 7ehe Riant extract” eed ss.dnaienemm ssh sas ecapes tae. 2 eee BO
INGPAECS  orecicfrag s oaais © remaninns sacs GtREiNA Tedes a osu se sublaaewels « of O86
Phenoldisulfonic acid method ..............cccececccecccccccececcceeees 36
BRLUCENS, TAECNOR ” nin ssacchare oars. 0-n eenaisraqneaievy vipers en 1esisle, Sea's. Ge or wales on GE. ED
AMMONS esihiaca: nonsge sancerepuetiens on cauienceds Se serene ene es ab ces.- ST
PHosphorus). 2 5giscuisprens 0345 6 gneiss 654 FRAMED RSS Ge cba eardurenevecwasie, BS
MRUMTS, shidniddnas'sv pastes sine s'shioasucladiaie a Geeachxew «vee dnteiaincascce., al é
CAlIUIT-T. «. caeanieewgtoretatnten 6.5:5.0 eiisiricegis.a oan «arg Rian Geadadasehinasacse tate 39
Magmeshun  sissesareregy:es's « 5.6 9  o deigistere & 8 Fie 9 9 SrIE 0.6 ESS wleHaaaS oe ese.0 « evosssbvanre owe ae OD
Calculations, | a sktstseieissaie s.h5 bateisbeinie:6.o:0's-chjsmrtins ds'e ne eusaiiead oe etatingaedess 40) :
QUANTITATIVE CALIBRATION OF TEST CHARTS ..........00ccceeeeeececeesceses 40
Composite Solution Standards for the Calibration of the Charts ............ 41
AppLicaTion Or Tests To DrainaGE WaTER From SOILs,
ERRIGATION' “WATERS, (ETC. 055 diddiasneds ss Qomener ers eeeehcate ee 49
ADAPTATION OF Quick Tests To Satine Or ALKALI SOILS ................222-. 45
THE INTERPRE:ATION OF SOI TESTS .......... cece ccc c ccc ce cece cece eeccscceee 45
poll Reaction (pH) ‘Tests: -.:.% sosciaiiis oe onwurensivinss eeamurgen dameekecee 47
Conditions Indicated by Various Quick Tests ...................ccceeeeeeee 48
Nitrogen Tests (ammonia, nitrite and nitrate) ..................00eeceeee 48
EROSPHONUS: (ESE) ox aiccckstie ane + os ningstar oo Heme Ee eae RU eer ERE” ESO
Potasstm: Test) osc 2 cwuneerns cds cininiens 2 ese sypraple sss 63 mebimameokaa cas teee- SL
Calcium Test’ as « <atiscipensps nbs ngivtalsinuss 4h aeaeiie sake e oeedeeeece mae! 52
Aluminum: Tests 5s :sssic,esoanis ssac sae viapyeite 6.2 vs osama be ob aba swans cus lsaame 58
PAGNGAMESE! LOSE 5.8 sceicterereteiaye ss Fa AeA wie 55-4 priawholed v.06 of Gewese dijacees ean’, BD :
SAONS, LORE Is one or dastacharacninigue.n opel La clad ebye RRs: SEs chesmdumepwatss<n SA F
Indication, OF Oeher jLests) cc's vss vse civnecs-s's¥ 955.50 os scavimepeteisesva 54
SUMMARY (ac ca xesswiesiqusie « ctnbs steheie cease anaes sedans ees dSSSRRameee es 56
RESERENCER  itiine oh oe mdrhsareeeH gs.) onan wees a eens « Senemeiraaay Oe 1
APPENDIX, sacesppgees is sed os appmiare s 2i6 senpetenie/s4555%.s Sein ees beatae ates. 60
Procedures in Brief for the Principal Tests ......................2-2222++-- 60
Color and Turbidity Charts ..................e.e0eeeeeee2+++ FollowS PAGE 60

: FOREWORD
The name M. F. Morgan is known to all workers in soil testing. Dr.
Morgan not only was one of the earliest workers in this field but he was
a pioneer in pushing back the frontiers of science on this phase of soils
research. His “Universal Soil Testing System” is a monument to his re-
searches.

In 1927 he started research on soil testing with the designing of a
porcelain soil test block for determining soil reaction in the field by
means of indicators. The second step was the development of a nitrate
nitrogen test with diphenylamine, using the soil reaction test block. Then
followed the addition of tests for ammonia, phosphorus, calcium, aluminum,
chlorides, and sulfate, using separate extractants for each, and the in-
troduction of the artist slab or spot plate. The original test block was
retained for reaction tests but was enlarged to permit three tests to be
made simultaneously.

In 1935 Dr. Morgan introduced the highly buffered “Universal” ex-

; tracting solution, which permitted ,all of the principal tests to be con-
ducted on portions of one extract, and substituted the filter funnel for
the Morgan test block. At the same time the following tests were added:

. potassium, magnesium, manganese, iron, nitrite nitrogen and sodium. The
pH meter was adopted for reaction tests in the laboratory but the soil
test blocks were still used in the field.

By this time the Morgan System had become widely known and adopted
in many other states and foreign countries. Subsequent development took
the form of added tests - boron, zinc, copper, mercury, lead and arsenic.

Morgan’s last soil test bulletin*, Number 450, entitled “Chemical Soil
Diagnosis by the Universal Soil Testing System” was unusually well re-
ceived, and the supply of copies was soon exhausted. Because of the
persistent demand for that bulletin, it has been deemed advisable to re-
print it after incorporating certain revisions. Among the changes are
the following: (a) rearrangement of the text, particularly the bringing
together of directions for reagent preparation and test procedure; (b)
incorporation of improved procedures, resulting from advances made in
soil testing methods; (c) expansion of the section on plant tissue test-
ing; (d) the omission of certain portions of the section on interpretation
of soil tests; and (e) reduction of the number of color charts from six

to four. =

The tests herein described still comprise the Morgan Soil Testing

: System and it is to its founder, Dr. M. Francis Morgan, that this bulletin
is dedicated.
1Dr, Morgan lost his life on the Island of Leyte in the Philippine Islands January 15, 1945,

while serving in the military forces.

The Morgan Soil Testing System
H. A. Lunt, C. L. W. Swanson, and H. G. M. Jacobson * :

Soil testing offers a valuable contribution to the more intelligent man-
agement of the soil. The competent use of soil tests can help forestall
crop failures due to inadequate or excessive fertilization and prevent waste-
ful use of unnecessary fertilizer ingredients. Soil tests can also be made
during the growing season to check on the need for top or side dressings
on certain crops, and thereby make possible increased yields..

The use of soil testing has spread rapidly and widely during the
past 12 to 15 years, and its importance to-agriculture has been firmly
established.

However, the best fertilizer and liming practices cannot overcome the
injurious effects of deficient or excessive moisture conditions, poor soil
tilth, weed competition, improper cultural methods, deficiency of organic
matter, or insect and plant disease troubles. Alb these factors must be
reasonably favorable for plant growth, otherwise the most thoughtful care
in providing suitable nutrient conditions will come to naught.

THE SOIL SAMPLE
Sampling

The interpretation of soil tests is based on the assumption that the
sample actually tested is truly representative of the soil in the particular
field or area sampled. Soils that are different in appearance, crop growth
response, or past treatment should be sampled separately.

No simple rule for soil sampling will apply to all cases. Common
sense is the best guide, bearing in mind that the final mixed portion
actually subjected to test is only a spoonful from an area of land usually
consisting of thousands of tons of soil. If the sample is not representative,
the tests may lead to erroneous interpretation and unsound recommen-
dations.

Soil Sampling Instructions ,

In cultivated fields and gardens, the soil is sampled by taking ver-
tically cut shovel or trowel slices of uniform thickness, or borings, to a
depth of 5 or 6 inches; in the case of permanent sod, such as pastures
and lawns, the depth should be 2 or 3 inches. Each sample submitted for
testing should be a composite of from 10 to 20 samplings well distributed
over the field, garden or lawn. ‘The number of places sampled depends
on the size of the area and the uniformity of the soil.
| RE eer
1 Department of Soils. Grateful acknowledgment is made to T. R. Swanback of this Station’s

Tobacco Laboratory at Windsor for many helpful suggestions in the preparation of this

bulletin, and to B, A. Brown, Arthur Hawkins, A. V. King and J. S. Owens of the Univer-
sity of Connecticut for reviewing the manuscript.

8 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
The soil from the various samplings should be mixed thoroughly and
the larger stones and coarse roots removed. From a half pint to a pint '
of this mixture is sufficient to save for testing. If the soil is very wet,
spread it out to air dry before mixing. It should not be dried in a heated
oven. Ordinarily it is not advisable to sample when the soil is saturated
with water, nor when it is extremely dry. Sampling tools must be free of
lime, fertilizer, or other contaminent.
In fields or areas having more than one distinct soil type or import-
ant differences in past treatment or crop growth, a separate sample should
be taken from each part. Likewise, portions of a field that show de-
finitely poorer results than the average, where the cause is not readily
explainable by obvious physical soil differences, should be sampled sep-
arately for comparison with samples from areas of normal production.
Separate samples from the subsoil may be desirable for the additional
information they will provide. This would be helpful in the case of or-
chards, for example.
In fields where fertilizers have been applied in bands alongside the
row, as in the case of potatoes and some vegetables, the sampling should
be done between the rows or directly in the row between plants, avoid- 1
ing the fertilizer band.
Preparation for Mailing '
Pack the soil in a clean carton, box or bag not previously used for
drugs, chemicals, fertilizer or other contaminating substances. Small candy
boxes, ice cream cartons or coffee cans are satisfactory containers. Each
sample should be marked by number, name of field, or other identifying
legend, and should include the name and address of the person submit-
ting the sample.
Soils are received for testing at the following laboratories in Connecticut:
Soils Departrhent, Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station,
New Haven
Tobacco Laboratory, Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station,
Windsor
Agronomy Department, University of Connecticut, Storrs
Supplementary Information
Inasmuch as the cropping history and previous use of lime, fertilizer, ,
or other materials influence the results obtained in the tests, and the
use to which the land is to be put in the future has a bearing on the
interpretation, the following information or as much of it as can be sup-
plied should accompany the samples. When the samples are brought to
the laboratory most of this intermation may be given orally:
1. Soil type name, if known. .
2. Crop or crops to be grown,
3. Crops grown during each of the preceding 3 to 5 years.

Morgan Soil Testing System 9
4. Soil treatment with respect to lime, manure, fertilizer, etc.,
in each of the preceding 3 to 5 years.
5. Character of the land surface (whether hilly, rolling or level).
6. Drainage, either natural, or as improved by tile or ditches.
7. vey formation (whether “hardpan”, sand, gravel or
TOCK).
8. Special soil features, such as mellowness or hardness, ten-
dency to erode, unusual shallowness of soil, stoniness, etc.
9. Approximate size of area represented by the sample.
10. Amount and kind of manure available for soil improvement.
11. Description of all unusual conditions, and abnormal results
caused by known or unknown factors.
Time of Sampling
The soil is a dynamic body, teeming with micro-organisms whose ac-
tivities vary from day to day and from season to season with changes
in temperature, moisture and food supply. Nitrate and ammonia ni-
trogen contents of the soil are especially variable, as will be discussed
in the section on test interpretation. A rapidly growing crop depletes
soil of the nutrients required for plant growth. Thus, at the end of
the growing season, soils show high tests for nitrates and potassium only
when the amounts of these constituents added in the fertilizer, or be-
coming available in the soil, are in excess of crop demands. There are
also seasonal fluctuations in soil acidity which influence the availability
of plant nutrients to some extent. The degree of acidity is associated
with the leaching of bases and production of nitrates. Acidity is nor-
mally at a minimum in early spring and at a maximum in midsummer.
All of the above factors must be taken into consideration in the in-
terpretation of the tests. For general soil diagnosis, tests on samples taken
in early spring are most reliable. Soils studied during the growing sea-
son give tests closely related to the performance of the crop, and are
particularly valuable in determining immediate need for supplemental fer-
tilization.. Tests in the autumn after the crop is harvested best indicate
whether or not the fertilizer has been in excess of crop needs. Fall test-
ing has the added advantage of allowing ample time in which to obtain
materials and lay plans for spring work. The choice of time when the
sample is to be taken depends, therefore, upon the purpose for which
the test is made.
Preparing the Soil Sample for Testing
The field-collected sample, upon receipt for testing, is usually more
or less moist. If too sticky to be screened, it should be dried to a
mellowmoist condition. It is mever dried in a heated oven. After mixing
the entire sample, a portion of suitable size (usually about 100 ml)
should be screened through a 2 mm or 10-mesh sieve to remove stones,
gravel or coarse roots, and then mixed. The screened sample, if moist,
should either be tested promptly (within 12 hours or so), or placed in
a refrigerator or spread out to dry for later testing. Although the first

10 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
. procedure is preferable, it is more convenient from a practical standpoint
in making many determinations in the laboratory to allow all samples to
become air-dry before testing, thus placing them all on a comparable
basis. If held for some time, they should be kept away from laboratory
fumes, particularly ammonia or acid vapors.
SOIL TEXTURE

Soil texture, involving the relative proportion of sand, silt and clay in
the soil, is an important consideration in the proper interpretation of
soil quick tests. A definite measure of soil texture is obtained by mech-
anical analysis. A useful method, giving satisfactory practical results on
most soils, is the hydrometer technique devised by Bouyoucos (3, 4).
However, it is usually impractical to make such measurements on. the
large numbers of soil samples usually involved in quick test operations.
As a rule, the texture of the soil can be fairly well assessed by a skilled
observer, chiefly on the basis of the feel of a moderately moist soil when
rubbed between the thumb and forefinger. A few simple rules are help-
ful in this connection for characterizing soils of the more common tex-
tural classes.

Loamy sand: harsh, gritty feel; very slight tendency of the moist soil
to stick together when pressed.

Sandy loam: definitely gritty; when moist the soil may be pressed in-
to a soft mass, and when moistened to its maximum sticky point it is
not perceptibly sticky.

Fine sandy loam: mellow and only moderately gritty feel; when moist,
the soil may be pressed into a firm mass. At its maximum sticky point
it is very slightly sticky.

Loam: mellow, moderately smooth feel; moist soil may be rolled into
firm rods; slightly sticky.

Silt loam: smooth and “floury” feel; moist soil rather sticky; readily
rolled into firm, slender rods.

Clay loam: very smooth “slippery” feel; definitely sticky when moist;
easily modeled into any shape.

A more detailed description of soil textures has been published by the
Soil Survey Division of the United States Department of Agriculture’

ESTIMATION OF SOIL ORGANIC MATTER CONTENT

Some evaluation of the organic matter content of a soil is also es-
sential to the proper interpretation of soil tests. A number of soil test-
ing laboratories make some measurements of organic matter as a sup-
plement to the quick test procedure. A reliable, reasonably rapid tech-
nique is the Tiurin (46) modification of the Schollenberger (39) di-
1Committee Report on Soil Texture. Soil Survey Division, Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils
and Agricultural Engineering, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Beltsville, Md. 1949. Mimeographed,

Morgan Soil Testing System 11
chromate method, also outlined by Merkle (26). Thomas and Williams
: (44) employ a modified adaptation of the Schollenberger method, involv-
ing only partial decomposition of all of the organic matter. ,
5 A useful soil measurement is loss-on-ignition, determined by igniting
: the previously oven-dried soil at dull red heat to constant weight. How-
ever, it gives values of much higher magnitude than can be ascribed to
the organic matter content, particularly on loamy or clay soils relatively
low in humus, due to the volatilization of chemically combined water
and certain inorganic elements. Such a procedure is most satisfactory
when soils of similar textural type are being compared.
Persons who are familiar with the color of the soil at various organic
levels can usually make a fair estimate of organic matter by observation.
It must be borne in mind that the dark color imparted to the soil by
humus is deepened by moisture; also, that a sandy soil is much darker
at the same organic content than a heavier soil. Under Connecticut con-
ditions, the colors of moderately dry soils, at varying organic levels, are
approximately as follows:
1 TABLE 1. APPROXIMATE ORGANIC MATTER CONTENT OF SOILS
IN CONNECTICUT AS INDICATED BY COLOR
‘ Soil Texture
- "Fine sandy — Loam or Clay
Loamy sand Sandy loam loam silt loam loam
Soil Color? 7 % OM ##%OM j.%OM #%OM % OM
Brownish yellow,
reddish yellow,
or light gray <0.5 <0.7 <1.0 <1.2 <15
Light yellowish brown,
light reddish brown,
or light
brownish gray 0.5-1.0 0.7-1.5 1.0-2.0 1.2-2.5 1.5-3.0
Grayish brown,
brown or
yellowish
brown 1.0-2.5 1.5-3.0 2.0-4.0 2.5-5.0 3.0-6.0
Dark brown,
dark reddish
brown or
dark grayish
4 brown 2.5-4.0 3.0-5.0 4.0-6.0 5.0-7.0 6.0-8.0
Very dark brown,
dark reddish
. gray, or black >4.0 >5.0 >6.0 >7.0 >8.0
1 Color names taken from Committee Report on Soil Color. Soil Survey Division, Bureau of
Plant Industry, Soils and Agricultural Engineering, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Beltsville, Md.
1948. Mimeographed.
In prairie regions, soils are usually darker at the organic matter con-
tent indicated in the above scheme.

12 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
SOIL REACTION (pH) TESTS

Soil reaction, in terms of the pH scale, is one of the most important
single factors involved in the chemical fertility of soils. Knowledge of
the degree of acidity or alkalinity is almost essential to the proper
interpretation of the results of the other chemical tests, especially those
for phosphorus, calcium, magnesium, aluminum and manganese. The pH
test is necessarily a separate measurement from the tests that are ap-
plied to the soil extract in the Morgan Soil Testing System.

Most laboratories and soil testing centers use a pH meter for deter-
mining soil reaction. Reliable instruments are on the market, most of
which are of the glass electrode type. The research laboratory sets op-
erating on dry cells are the most accurate, but the recently developed AC
line-operated pH meters are easier and faster to manipulate, are free of
battery worries, and are sufficiently accurate for routine soil testing.

The quinhydrone electrode type of instrument is sometimes used with
good results but it is subject to considerable error on certain soils, par-
ticularly those containing oxidizing substances such as manganese dioxide.

Procedure With Glass Electrode pH Meter

Into a small beaker (50 or 100 ml) place enough soil to make it about
one-third full, then add distilled water, while stirring, until the mixture
attains the consistency of a thin paste or thick soup. Immerse the elec-
trodes and take the reading. Soils high in organic matter, particularly
peats, should be allowed. to soak with occasional stirring for half an hour
or more before taking the reading.

Soils that have been allowed to air dry tend to show a slightly higher
acidity (lower pH value) but the difference is usually less than 0.2
pH, which can ordinarily be ignored.

Colorimetric Method for pH

When testing is not conducted on a sufficient scale to justify the
purchase of a pH meter, the measurement of soil reaction may be done
colorimetrically by the use of indicator dyes.

Reasonably accurate results can be obtained with narrow-range dyes,
provided the proper dye is chosen for the sample being tested. Generally
with unknowns the test is facilitated by using three dyes simultaneously,
with the expectation that one of them will encompass the pH of the
sample.

For app‘oximations where an accuracy of 0.5 pH is sufficient, one
can use a dye with a wider range, say from pH 4 to 8. Full range. in-
dicators, pH 1 to 14, are of no value in soil testing work.

Determining pH with Single Dyes

Indicators: Bromcresol green, chlorphenol red, and bromthymol blue

prepared separately, each at a concentration of 0.04%. The total range

Morgan Soil Testing System 13
covered by these three indicators is from pH 3.8 to 7.6. For extremely
acid soils, pH 3.0 - 4.6, use bromphenol blue 0.04%; and in regions of
neutral to alkaline soils, use cresol red (pH 7.2 - 8.8) and thymol blue
(pH 8.0 - 9.6), both at 0.04% concentration.

Procedure: Place about % teaspoonful of soil in a small test tube
34” x 4” is a convenient size), add a small quantity of barium sulfate’,
4 ml of distilled water and 3 drops of indicator. Stir vigorously with a
glass rod, and allow to settle. (Stirring is more satisfactory than shak-
ing). Compare the color of the supernatant liquid with a color chart
or with the colors described in Table 2.

Determining pH with Wide-Range Dyes

Indicator: Equal quantities (0.025 g) of bromcresol green, bromcresol
purple, and cresol red are ground together in a mortar with about 1.5 ml
of normal NaOH solution and % ml of distilled water, then diluted to
100 ml with distilled water (37). Alternatively, one may use a com-
mercial indicator which has approximately the same range.

Procedure: Identical to that described for single dyes. The colors ob-
tained are as follows’:

L
‘ Acidity pH Color
Very strongly acid 4.0 Wax yellow
Strongly acid 4.5 Light greenish yellow
Acid 5.0 Light olive green or dark yellow green
Moderately acid 5.5 Grass green or very dark yellow green
Slightly acid 6.0 Pistachio green (a grayish green)
Very slightly acid 6.5 Delft blue (a grayish blue)
Neutral 7.0 Light bluish violet
Alkaline 8.0 Mulberry purple
DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE MORGAN
SOIL TESTING SYSTEM

Since the publication of Bulletin 450 (34), Peech and English (36)
have made rather extensive studies on the use of the methods herein
described. In an effort to increase the accuracy of the results, they in-
troduced a number of refinements for some of the tests and made some
substitutions in the case of others.

Mego apt searing, teen Gh te ay Sait Sine
pick as a spatula, all that it will hold up to the line constitutes one measure. Use one or
two measures for each sample of soil. The only purpose of the barium sulfate is to hasten
the clarification of the suspension. If omitted, it is necessary to wait from one to eight
hours for the suspension to clarify.

2 Color names are taken from hes tags “Color Standard and Color Nomenclature”. A, Hoen

and Company, Baltimore, Md. 1912.

14 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
TABLE 2. APPROXIMATE COLOR RANGES FOR pH INDICATORS USEFUL IN SOILS WORK
Brom- Brom- Chlor- Brom- Cresol r
pH phenol cresol phenol thymol red
blue green red blue
3.0 yellow a cece eeee se eeeeee njeya-elotiete
3.4 L a as re ave
grading
3.8 A yellow eae sans SER paaenes 3
4.2 to greenish aneeanse aseeseee i
1 yellow
4.6 lavender green ec #53 sen Si isssoietis
violet
5.0 PeetTy: blue yellowish Le tiroxenestne ree
green orange
5.4 sides 0 blue orange os diareeual 3s iatararate
5.8 danses mae aretha reddish yellow a serere. cols
salmon
6.2 oe tah TT salmon greenish ip vahatajatara
pink yellow ;
6.6 38 de a is ya rose yellowish sete inisiete
green
7.0 ara u ae oe tenie as anes green gia: sib-ous
74 aig erates ae chicrans aia tare greenish orange
blue yellow
7.8 So. cpateetire Sararateiaiere blue salmon
8.2 site scat A Ie atueas ees erccagte ate yellowish
: red
purple
9.0 ieaeereu saraarsraate se ancteteniara sewed BUtobe purple
The value of their work is fully recognized, and for certain purposes
where a greater degree of accuracy is required and time taken to make
the tests is of secondary importance, their proposed changes should be
incorporated in the procedure. However, for routine soil testing where speed
is essential and labor and laboratory space are limited, the tests des-
cribed in the present bulletin are believed adequate for the purposes for 1
which they are intended. It should be remembered that the procedures
described in this bulletin are primarily quick tests.
The Morgan Soil Extracting Solution
A distinctive feature of the soil testing methods herein described is
the employment of a single extracting solution that permits the develop-
ment of specific tests for determining the nutrient status of the soil.
|

Morgan Soil Testing System 15
The extracting solution is a 10% solution of sodium acetate (0.73N)
in 3% acetic acid (0.52N), and has a pH of 4.8¢ This provides a weakly
ionized organic acid buffered with its sodium salt*. It is suitable for
the usual routine tests and for most others with the exception of sodium
and chlorine. These require separate extractions with appropriate so-
lutions.

All chemicals used for making the tests described in this bulletin
should be of C.P. or A.R. grade or of a special type as noted.
Preparation of the Extracting Solution

Add 100 g of sodium acetate (NaC2H302.3H2O) to 500 ml of distilled
water. After this is dissolved, add 30 ml of glacial acetic acid and make
up to 1 liter.

General Plan

The filtered extract obtained from soil treated with the Morgan soil
extracting solution or other extractant is tested for various constituents
by transferring small quantities, usually from 1 to 10 drops, to either

» a porcelain or glass spot plate, or to small glass vials of uniform size
(10 mm by 60 mm), to which is added the appropriate reagents for
the development of the color or turbidity tests in question. The general

, plan of these tests follows for the most part the technique for micro-
chemical tests extensively developed by Feigl (14, 15, 16). Application
of such procedures in quick chemical soil testing was first reported by
Morgan in connection with the nitrate test (30).

Chemical tests of this type must be conducted with reagents that are
sensitive to approximately the same concentration of any given constit-

é uent likely to be present in the soil extract, without interference by any
other ions that may be present. Where such interference does occur
by giving a similar test or by increasing or decreasing the sensitivity
of the test, the extract must be purified by some chemical technique
designed to remove or inactivate the disturbing substance. This may be
accomplished in a refined laboratory method, but it is not ordinarily
practicable in quick test procedures.

Equipment

The following list itemizes the equipment normally required for con-
ducting the usual routine tests. Specifications are those that have been

found most generally desirable, and the tests are calibrated on the basis
of their use. A sufficient quantity of glassware, etc., is provided for
testing 12 soil samples at the same time’. For larger operations, the

numbers may be increased.
—_— reasons for selection of this type of extracting solution are given in Bulletin 450
2 Assembled sets of the above equipment and ommenciany. prepared ———e solutions and
reagents may be obtained from the LaMotte Chemical Products Company, Baltimore, Md.,

for those who desire this service,

16 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
1 Supply bottle, 10 liters or larger capacity, for soil extracting solution.
1 Cylinder, or burette, graduated to hold or deliver in 10 ml units.
1 Spoon, measuring, teaspoon size. -
1 Block, wooden, or a rack with 12 holes of 3% inch diameter, for
supporting filtering tubes. *
2 Blocks, wooden, or metal rack, with 12 holes of % inch diameter, for P
supporting test vials.
Filter paper, 9 cm diameter, C.S. and S.597, Munktell No. 0 or simi-
lar grade.
12 Tubes, soil filtering, 15 mm inside diameter, with funnel mouth 35
mm diameter and air vent (or separate tubes and funnels of similar
dimensions).
12 Medicine droppers*, with unflattened straight tip of 2 mm diameter,
or transfer pipettes graduated to 0.05 ml. *
12 Rods, glass, 4 mm by 100 mm. *
24 Vials*, glass, 60 mm long, 10 mm inside diameter.
6 Spot plates, white porcelain, containing 12 depressions of 20 mm dia-
meter and 7.5 mm depth (approximately 20 drops capacity).
1 Spot plate, clear glass, with 9 or 12 depressions.
9 Bottles, 1 oz., with dropper pipette in screw cap, for test reagents.
3 Bottles, 2 oz., with dropper pipette in screw cap, for test reagents.
1 Bottle, glass dropping stopper, 1 oz., for nitrate reagent.
-
The Soil Extraction
The procedure that has been used with success on the sandy loam and ‘
loam soils of Connecticut involves direct extraction of the soil with the
extracting solution. The soil mass is placed in a folded filter paper cone
and a measured amount of the extracting solution added to the soil,
percolating through it. This technique works best on soils that are readily
moistened throughout upon the addition of the first 2 or 3 ml of the
: extracting solution, so that the remainder of the liquid percolates readily
through the entire soil mass. Other investigators using the Morgan or
similar types of soil extractants have adopted other procedures of ex-
traction. While not as simple and rapid as the technique described above,
they may be used to advantage on soils that are less readily saturated
with the extractant, or those with heavier textures. Hence, alternate pro-
cedures of extraction are included.
Simple Percolation Extraction
Fit a folded filter paper of 9 cm diameter into the funnel of the
soil filtering tube (or an ordinary glass funnel); place a level teaspoon- _
ful of the soil sample inside the filter cone, and press down gently with
1 Medicine droppers should be carefully selected for uniformity of drop size, and vials for ~
uniform inside diameter.
2 Automatic pipettes which can be calibrated to deliver small quantities of solution are ob-
tainable in some supply houses.
3In place of stirring rods, one can use a-glass tube of small bore, with one end tapered and
curved. Stirring is accomplished by blowing through the tube.
|

Morgan Soil Testing System 17
the back of the spoon*. Measure out a 10 ml portion of the Morgan
extracting solution, and pour slowly over the soil mass in the filter. If
the soil does not readily absorb the liquid, the extraction procedure should
be repeated in another filter tube after first moistening the soil slightly
with distilled water. Permit the filtration to proceed to completion. If

the volume of leachate obtained is appreciably less than average, add
more extracting solution to equalize the volume. In removing the filter
cone of soil, squeeze it gently to extract any remaining liquid which may
have collected at its top. Remove the funnel and’ insert a clean medicine
dropper into the filtrate vessel. Pump the liquid up and down the med-
icine dropper 2 or 3 times to insure thorough mixing of the soil extract.

Each filtrate vessel should be supplied with an individual dropper for

transferring portions to the spot plates for the various tests.

Alternate Extraction I
Place a teaspoonful of soil, gently packed and leveled, into a 50 ml

beaker. Add 10 ml of the Morgan soil extracting solution. Stir vig-

orously for 1 minute and filter through a paper of quality indicated above
into a 20 by 75 mm glass vial or other suitable container. Remove the
funnel and insert a clean eyedropper pipette into the filtrate vessel.

1 Proceed as directed above.

Goss and Owens (18) recommend placing the soil and extracting so-
lution in a 50 ml Erlenmeyer flask and shaking with an automatic shak-

‘ ing machine for 15 minutes before filtration. Results by such a procedure
are somewhat higher, for some constituents, than by the shorter time
of extraction. However, data on check soils by various methods do not
show any consistent improvement in correlation for the more exhaustive
extractions
Alternate Extraction II

Place a rubber policeman over the end of the stem of a 50 mm filter
funnel provided with an 18 mm disc of fritted glass (porosity-1). Add

10 ml of the extracting solution and a level teaspoonful of the soil sample.

After 15 minutes, remove the policeman, permitting the extract to drain

into the collecting flask or tube. This general procedure has also been

used by Thomas and Williams (44) and by Miles (28). Results have
not been studied in detail in comparison with the simple percolation ex-
traction, but they are believed to be similar to those obtained by the

Goss and Owens modification.

It is likely that no one method of extraction will be uniformly appli-
cable to all types of soil. It is suggested that each of the procedures
be studied on numerous soil representatives of the locality involved, be-

fore selecting the one that appears to be the most desirable.

' The New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station places the soil first in a small paper cup,
adding one-quarter teaspoon of Darco carbon, grade No. 60, then nag | Morgan's ex-
tracting solution, stirring the mixture for 1 minute, and then ot cg Se on the filter paper,
Use of the carbon produces clear soil extracts, especially in soils high in organic matter.
Private communication from A. L, Prince.

18 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
Lighting Conditions in Conducting the Tests

It is possible to make reasonably close comparisons of color and tur-
bidity reactions developed in the various quick tests under good natural
light. A north or northeast window is preferable, since the reflections
obtained in direct sunlight make matchings difficult. However, natural
lighting is unsatisfactory on dark, cloudy days and in late afternoons
in the winter season; hence, artificial illumination by a good fluorescent
lamp equipped with daylight bulbs is desirable. The value of attention
to lighting and other details in soil testing techniques has been discussed
by Constable and Miles (8).

Special Precautions

All glassware, spot plates, stirring rods, etc., should be washed with
clean tap water and rinsed with distilled water immediately after being
used. The spot plates require occasional cleaning with a sulfuric acid-
dichromate cleaning solution to remove stains.

The medicine droppers may be washed by vigorously pumping water
in and out of them by intermittent pressure on their bulbs. Any adhering
precipitates should be carefully brushed loose from the bottoms of the
test vials before using for testing work.

Reagent bottles should be kept clean, and encrustations should not
be permitted to accumulate around their caps.

Vials, droppers, pipettes ’ and other measuring equipment used should be
standardized to insure that the same amount of reagent is added each
time. Technique of using such equipment should also be standardized to
obtain best results.

Any reagent that fails to give a satisfactory blank test with the soil
extracting solution, or that fails to give correct tests with solution stand-
ards or on “standard” soils should be rejected. It is advisable to check
reagents by testing the solutions with a standard solution every three
or four days.

TESTS MOST COMMONLY USED IN ROUTINE TESTING
Nitrate Nitrogen

The diphenylamine test originally used for nitrates has been replaced
by the brucine method because of the greater dependability of the latter.
Both methods, however, are described.
1The University of New Hampshire Agricultural Experiment Station uses a 1 m! Mohr pipette
for measuring the soil extract, graduated in 1/100, as follows:

Nitrate nitrogen 0.05 ml
Ammonia nitrogen -2 mi
Aluminum -l ml
Phosphorus, magnesium,
potassium, and calcium 5 ml
Private communication from G. P. Percival.

Morgan Soil Testing System 19
Brucine Method *

Reagent A: Dissolve 1 g of brucine in 25 ml of chloroform. Store
in a tightly stoppered amber glass dropping bottle, and while in use
keep one finger over the mouth of the bottle to prevent evaporation.

Reagent B: Sulfuric acid, concentrated (sp. gr. 1.84).

Procedure: To 3 drops of soil extract in a spot plate (or glass vial)
add 2 drops of brucine solution and 7 drops of sulfuric acid. Mix well.
Readings may be taken at once (or within a few seconds), or after 12
to 15 minutes. In the first case the colors for low to very high readings
range from a pale gray or pinkish gray to a salmon red; in the second

: case from light gray to bright yellow. A color chart for the latter is
contained in the Appendix. In‘ the case of very high readings the test
should be repeated on a diluted extract. (To one drop of extract add
9 drops of extracting solution, mix and test as above. The reading ob-
tained should be multiplied by 10).

Diphenylamine Method *

Nitrate nitrogen reagent: Dissolve 0.05 g of diphenylamine in 25 ml
of concentrated sulfuric acid at a temperature not to exceed 24°C. Store
in a clear glass-stoppered dropping bottle protected from bright light.
The resulting solution should have no trace of bluish color, and should
give a colorless “spot” when 4 drops are added to 1 drop of distilled
water. This test should be made frequently since continued exposure
to light and accidental contamination may require the preparation of a
fresh reagent. The solution is very corrosive, and should not be allowed
to come into contact with rubber. Care should also be taken to prevent
injury to hands or clothing.

Testing Procedure: Transfer 1 drop of soil extract to the spot plate.
Add 4 drops of the reagent; let stand for 2 minutes; stir and compare
the intensity of the resultant blue color with the color chart.

Stirring immediately after adding the reagent is not recommended, since
the blue color develops most rapidly in the film of contact between the
reagent and the extract. Somewhat deeper colors result from prolonged
standing in excess of 2 minutes, but for convenience of operation, the
charts are standardized on the basis of this time.

If a very deep blue color is obtained, the test should be repeated on
a diluted solution as described for the brticine test.

If the first drop of the reagent produces an immediate blue color, the
presence of nitrogen as the nitrite is suggested, and a test for nitrite is
desirable.

1 Adapted from the method proposed by Peech and English (36).

2 Adapted from the method originally proposed by Morgan (30),

20 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
Ammonia Nitrogen

. Nessler’s reagent: Dissolve 5 g of potassium iodide in 15 ml of dis-
tilled water. Add a saturated solution of mercuric chloride until a slight
precipitation occurs. Add 40 ml of a 50% solution of potassium hy-
droxide. Dilute to 100 ml, allow to settle for one week, decant and
keep in a brown glass bottle. Two drops of this reagent, added to 4 drops
of the Morgan leaching solution, should give a practically colorless spot.
Nessler’s reagent prepared according to other reliable laboratory formulae
may also be employed.

Testing Procedure: Transfer 4 drops of the soil extract to the spot
plate. Add 2 drops of the reagent. Let stand 1 minute; then stir and
compare the resultant yellow to orange color with the color chart in
the Appendix.

Phosphorus

Reagent A: Dissolve 12.5 g of sodium molybdate, by gentle heating,
in 100 ml of distilled water. Mix 50 ml of glacial acetic acid and 350
ml of distilled water in a 600 ml beaker. Add the above solution of
sodium molybdate slowly with constant stirring to the acetic acid so-
lution. Store in a brown glass bottle.

This reagent should not show more than a trace of sediment in the
bottle in which it is stored. If the molybdate has a definite tendency
to precipitate, the reagent is unreliable. When properly prepared, this
reagent should be stable for 6 months or more; but unless the directions
are carefully followed, it may deteriorate in a much shorter time.

Reagent B: Stannous oxalate solution. This should be prepared fresh
on the day of use. On the flat end of an ordinary wooden toothpick
make a pencil or ink mark % to %¢ inch from the end. All of the
stannous oxalate the toothpick will hold up to that mark is added to
10 ml of Morgan’s extracting solution. Mix well, making sure all is dis-
solved before using.

Testing Procedure: Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the spot
plate. Add 1 drop of reagent A and 2 drops of reagent B (the latter
freshly prepared on the day of use). Stir, let stand for 1 minute and
compare the intensity of blue color with the color chart in the Appendix.

If more than 1 drop of reagent A is added, the test is abnormally high.
If more than 2 drops of reagent B are used, or if that reagent contains
more than the designated amount of stannous oxalate, a “dirty” blue
or greenish blue color results.

The test should be read in 1 minute since, with a longer period of
standing, the soil extracting solution when tested as a blank develops a
definite blue color. Also, upon standing for a longer time, the blue color
tends to develop a hue not readily matched with the chart.

Occasionally soils from golf greens and soils that have been treated
with mercury compounds yield a grayish to black precipitate upon the

Morgan Soil Testing System 21
: addition of reagent B. This is due to reduction to metallic mercury by
the stannous compound in this reagent. In such a case, the phosphorus

cannot be reliably measured.

Soils that have been treated with heavy amounts of arsenic compounds
for insect grub or earthworm control may give abnormally high phos-
phorus tests. However, moderate treatments and arsenical spray residues
rarely affect the test by the procedure described above.

More exact readings of very high tests may be obtained by diluting
2 drops of extract with 8 drops of extracting solution.

Potassium *

Reagent A: Dissolve 5 g of cobalt nitrate (Co(NO3)2.6H2O) in 47.5
ml of distilled water and 2.5 ml of glacial acetic acid. Store in a brown
bottle. Dissolve 30 g of sodium nitrite (NaNOz2) in distilled water and
dilute to 50 ml with same. Store in a brown bottle. Mix these two
solutions in equal parts at least 24 hours before using, in quantities suf-
ficient to last one or two weeks. Cover the container loosely overnight
to allow escape of the poisonous nitric oxide fumes. Filter if necessary
and store in a brown, glass-stoppered bottle. This final solution, sodium-
cobaltinitrate, may deteriorate after a few weeks if not stored in a
refrigerator. The danger of deterioration can be avoided by mixing only
enough of the final solution to last a short time.

Reagent B: Mix 90 ml of iso-propyl alcohol with 10 ml of neutral
formaldehyde. Store in a bottle with a tightly fitting screw cap.

Testing Procedure: Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the test
vial (10 mm inside diameter). Add 1 drop of reagent A and 12 drops
of reagent B. Let stand 1 minute; shake the vial gently and let stand
2 minutes longer. Estimate the resulting amount of yellow precipitate by
the following use of the “line” chart: .

Hold the vial in a vertical position directly over the lines on the chart,
with the bottom of the vial %4 inch above them. Look down through the
vial at the different groups of lines, until the set is found which can be
barely perceived. The test is read which corresponds to this set of lines.

The printed “line” chart does not permit precise differentiation at the
lowest tests. If but the faintest perceptible turbidity is to be observed,
the estimate should be “very low”. If the liquid remains clear and lim-
pid, the estimate should be “trace”.

If the test is very much beyond the visibility of the deepest lines
on the chart, a preliminary dilution of the extract with the extracting
solution may be made, although the results are apt to be less reliable than
in the case of most of the other tests. It is necessary to mix fully the
diluted liquid before testing.

Chart for Potassium (and Sodium): Additional charts for potassium
(and sodium) may be prepared with India ink as described below.
Sa A i SSE
1 For procedures using a flame photometer, see Stanford, G., and English, L. Use of the flame

photometer in rapid soil tests for K and Ca. Agron. Jour. 41: 446-447, 1949.

22 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
Relative
Test Index
10 India ink full strength; wide line (about 142”)
8 India ink 2 parts; water 1 part.
6 India ink 1 part; water 4 parts.
4 India ink 1 part; water 12 parts.
2 India ink 1 part; water 16 parts.
1 Hard pencil (no. 4).
Lines for index 2 to 8 may be made about half the width of those
for index 10.
Calcium

Reagent: Mix 10 g of sodium oxalate with 100 ml of distilled water.
Let stand for 24 hours, and decant the clear supernatant solution to the
reagent bottle for use as required.

Procedure*: Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the test vial.
Add 1 drop of the reagent, shake vigorously and let stand for 5 minutes.
Estimate the resultant white turbidity by means of the “line” chart, as
described for potassium.

Magnesium .

Reagent A*: Dissolve 0.02 g of Thiazol yellow (General Aniline Works,
Rensselaer, N.Y.) in 100 ml of distilled water. Store in an amber glass
bottle.

Reagent B: Dissolve 15 g of sodium hydroxide in 100 ml of distilled
water. This is used also as manganese reagent B.

Procedure*: Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the spot plate.
Add 1 drop of reagent A and 3 drops of reagent B. Stir, let stand 1
minute and compare the resultant light salmon to deep red color with
the chart.

The magnesium test is somewhat affected by aluminum in amounts suf-
ficient to give high or very high tests. Under such conditions, the mag-
nesium test is somewhat lower than it should be. Due allowance should
be made for this factor in interpreting the tests.

Soils of high active calcium content give extracts that tend to coa-
gulate the magnesium color, making test readings difficult and unreliable.
This may be overcome in most cases by adding 4 drops of a 50%
glycerin solution prior to adding reagent A. The liquid in the test cup
should be stirred thoroughly with a glass rod before adding reagent B.

Aluminum

Reagent: Place 0.05 g of hematein (Eastman Kodak Company) in a
30 ml beaker. Add 5 ml of ethyl alcohol (95%). Triturate with a rub-
1 Adapted from the procedure proposed by Morgan (31).

2 Adapted from Mikkelson and Toth (27).
3 Adapted from the method of Spurway (43) in the use of reagent A,
| ."

Morgan Soil Testing System 23
ber tipped stirring rod and decant clear solution to the storage bottle.
Triturate with successive 5 ml portions of alcohol and decant, until all of
the hematein is dissolved. Make up to a volume of 100 ml with the
ethyl alcohol. (This should be freshly prepared every two months, and
should be stored in a refrigerator if possible).

Aluminum stain remover: Mix 25 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid
and 25 ml of distilled water. (Same as iron reagent A).

Testing Procedure’: Transfer 2 drops of the soil extract to the spot
plate. Add 2 drops of the Morgan soil extracting solution and 1 drop
of the reagent. Let stand 1 minute, and compare the resultant color with
the chart in the Appendix.

If a “dirty” blue-gray color results from this test, it is indicative of
abnormal concentrations of active iron, and a test for this constituent
is desirable.

After completing the reading, add 1 drop of the aluminum stain re-
mover (1:1 HCl) and shake the block gently before washing it. This
prevents the formation of a stain on the porcelain which interferes with
subsequent tests.

Manganese

Reagent A: Dissolve 0.1 g of benzidine in 20 ml of glacial acetic acid.
Dilute to 200 ml and filter.

Reagent B: Sodium hydroxide solution (See magnesium reagent B).

Reagent C: A saturated solution of potassium periodate in the Morgan
extracting solution.

Reagent D: Manganese reagent for supplemental test consisting of a
saturated solution of tetra-base (Eastman Kodak Company) in ethyl
alcohol (95%).

Testing Procedure*: Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the spot
plate. Add 2 drops of reagent A, stir and add 1 drop of reagent B. Stir
and compare the resultant blue color with the chart as quickly as pos-
sible, since the intensity of color fades rapidly after a few seconds.

If more than 1 drop of reagent B is added, or if the tip of the pipette
used in transferring that reagent is abnormally large, the test may fail,
since too much alkalinity interferes with the test.

If the soil contains abnormal concentrations of nitrite nitrogen, a brown-
ish yellow discoloration is to be noted in the routine manganese test.

If no perceptible blue color is detected, add 2 drops of reagent C.
Stir at once with a glass rod and let stand for 2 minutes. If not more
1 Adapted from the use of logwood extract in the testing for aluminum by Colwell and

Parker (7).
2 Adapted from the spot plate test of Feigl (12).
‘

24 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
than a faint blue color appears, the test is recorded as “negative”, and
the soil contains less than 2 pounds of manganese per acre. If there is’

a strong blue color, without a trace of green or yellow, a “trace”? amount
is read, representing approximately 2 pounds per acre. If the color is
green, gradually changing to yellow, this is recognized as “trace plus”,
or approximately 3 pounds per acre. If any blue color was apparent in
the previous stage of testing, a deep yellow to orange-yellow color de-
velops almost at once.

The above additional procedure is especially useful in differentiating
soils suspected of being manganese-deficient.

The following alternate procedure may also be used to advantage when
little or no reaction is obtained from the above method: Transfer 10
drops of the soil extract to the spot plate. Add 1 drop of reagent C and
1 drop of reagent D_ (tetra-base solution). A deep blue color develops
almost at once in soils usually rated as “very low” or better by the regular
method. When the resultant color is only faintly blue, the test may be
considered as “negative”. With experience, an operator can readily dis-
tinguish differences between tests even with the traces of extractable
manganese that usually typify manganese-deficient soils. It should also
be noted that traces of the violet permanganate color can be observed
upon the addition of reagent C alone, after 2 or 3 minutes, when the ex-
tract contains a considerable amount of manganese.

SPECIAL CHEMICAL TESTS

One or more of the following tests may be of definite diagnostic value
under conditions that seem to warrant them or when the abnormal con-
ditions of the soil are not evidently correlated with the routine tests.

Iron

Reagent A: Dilute hydrochloric acid of ordinary C.P. concentration
(approximately 38% HCl) with an equal volume of distilled water.

Reagent B: Dissolve 10 g of potassium ferrocyanide and 0.1 g of
potassium ferricyanide in 100 ml of distilled water.

Reagent C: Dissolve 15 g of potassium sulphocyanate in 100 ml of
distilled water.

Reagent D: Dissolve 0.2 g of potassium ferricyanide in 100 ml of dis-
tilled water.

Procedure for Ferric and Ferrous Iron’: Transfer 10 drops of the ex-
tract to the spot plate. Add 3 drops of reagent A and 1 drop of reagent
B. Stir, let stand 2 minutes. The resultant colors indicate amounts
approximately as follows:
1Jntroduced by Morgan (32) as a soil test,

Morgan Soil Testing System 25
Relative
Color Test Test Index :
Blue Very high 10
Blue green High 8
Apple green Medium high 6
Pale green Medium 4
Greenish yellow Low 2
Lemon yellow Very low 1

In this and subsequent iron tests, care should be taken to prevent
the soil extracting solution or soil extract from coming in contact with
any implement or piece of apparatus containing metallic iron.

Procedure for Ferric Iron: Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the
spot plate. Add 3 drops of reagent A and 1 drop of reagent C. Stir and
let stand 2 minutes. The resultant colors represent amounts approxi-
mately as follows:

Relative
Color Test Test Index
Deep brownish red Very high 10
Medium brownish red High 8
Pale brownish red Medium high 6
Very pale brownish red Medium 4
Slight reddish tint Low 2
Very faint reddish tint Very low 1

Procedure for Ferrous Iron: Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to
the spot plate. Add 2 drops of reagent A and 1 drop of reagent D.
Stir and let stand 2 minutes. The resultant colors and corresponding
tests are the same as indicated for the above general iron test (ferric
and ferrous).

A suggested alternate test for ferrous iron employs a reagent prepared
as follows: A 1% aqueous solution of alpha-alpha-dipyridyl, acidulated
with 1 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid per 100 ml. Ten drops of
the soil extract, treated with 2 drops of this reagent, give a deep red
color when considerable ferrous iron is present, grading to no color when
no ferrous iron is present. This is a somewhat more sensitive test than
the one described above.

Sulfate Sulfur
.

Reagent: Dissolve 5 g of barium chloride in 100 ml of distilled water.

Testing Procedure: Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the test
vial. Add 1 drop of the reagent. Shake vigorously and let stand for 5
minutes. The “line” chart as described for potassium on page 21 is used
in reading the results.

26 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541

Since this test is not sensitive over the range of concentrations exis-

ting in most soils of humid regions, except as a result of heavy ap-

plications of sulfate materials, it is not conducted as a routine procedure.
Nitrite Nitrogen

Reagent: Dissolve 1 g of sulphanilic acid, by gentle heating, in 100
ml of a saturated solution of ammonium chloride. Add 1.5 g of phenol
and mix thoroughly.

Testing Procedure’: Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the spot
plate. Add 1 drop of the nitrite reagent, 1 drop of hydrochloric acid
(1:1) and 4 drops of magnesium reagent B (15% NaOH). Stir and let
stand 1 minute. The resultant colors may be rated from the following:

Relative

Color Test Test Index
Yellowish orange Very high 10
Orange yellow High 7
Lemon yellow Medium 4
Pale yellow Low 2
Trace of yellowish tint Very low 1

Soils very rarely show readable nitrite tests under normal field con-
ditions.

Sodium

Reagent: Make up 2 separate lots as follows: (A) Urany] acetate, 10
g; acetic acid (30%), 6 ml; make up to 65 ml with distilled water.
Dissolve by heating. (B) Zinc acetate, 30 g; acetic acid (30%), 3 ml;
make up to 65 ml with water. Dissolve by heating. Add (A) to (B)
and continue heating until clear. Let stand several days and filter out
the sediment.

Special sodium extracting solution: Add 2 ml of copper sulfate solution
(10%) to 100 ml of distilled water.

Testing Procedure’: Since the Morgan soil extracting solution con-
tains sodium, the soil must be extracted with special sodium extracting
solution. The procedure of extraction is not otherwise different.

Transfer 5 drops of the extract, thus obtained, to a test vial. Add
20 drops (1 ml) of the reagent. Shake vigorously at 1 minute intervals
for 10 minutes and compare, using the potassium “line” chart described
on page 21.

1 Adapted from the test as employed by Spurway (43).

Morgan Soil Testing System 27

Soils in humid regions, except those receiving overflow water from
oceanic tides, rarely show readable tests by this procedure. This test
is especially applicable to alkaline conditions existing in arid soils.

Chloride

Reagent: Dissolve 2 g of silver nitrate in 100 ml of distilled water.
Store in an amber glass-stoppered bottle.

Testing Procedure’: Since the Morgan soil extracting solution gives
a precipitate of silver acetate when tested with the chloride reagent, the
soil must be extracted with distilled water. If clear extracts cannot be
obtained, a special chloride extracting solution is used*. The procedure
of extraction is the same in other respects.

Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the test vial. Add 1 drop of
the reagent. Shake vigorously and compare, using the potassium “line”
chart described on page 21.

This test is valuable on saline soils, or when contamination from sea
water or sea spray is suspected. Normal soils of humid regions rarely
give readable tests, except when recently receiving liberal amounts of
fertilizers containing chlorides.

Alternate Test for Chlorides

Reagent: Dissolve 4.25 g of silver nitrate and 2.7 g mercuric oxide
in a solution of 10 ml concentrated HNO: in 50 ml of distilled water.
Store in amber glass-stoppered bottle.

Testing Procedure*: Transfer 10 drops of soil extract to the test vial;
run also a blank (10 drops of Morgan’s soil extracting solution transferred
to a separate vial). Add 2 drops of the reagent to each vial; shake
vigorously. Add 2 more drops of the reagent to the blank as well as
to the unknown. Shake and compare, using the potassium “line” chart
described on page 21. A slight cloudiness (very low reading) indicates
about 10 ppm of Cl; a low reading, 20 ppm; a medium reading, 80 ppm.

Carbonates

Testing Procedure: A soil containing carbonates in appreciable amounts
is readily identified by the development of effervescence on the soil sur-
face when the Morgan soil extracting solution is filtered through it. This
usually results in the development of a convex soil surface at the end
of the extraction. No quantitative measurement is attempted.

Soils high in carbonates also give extracts which show white precipitates
on the addition of an alkaline reagent (ammonia reagent or magnesium
1 Adapted tii the test used by ‘ibang: (43). — > - ao
2$pecial chloride extracting solution: Dilute 13 ml of nitric acid of ordinary -concentration

(70%) to 1 liter, using distilled water. This solution is approximately 0.2 N (33).

3 Adapted from Montequi-Otero test for chlorides, Merck Index i.2863. Modified for Morgan
Soil Testing System by T. R. Swanback, Windsor Tobacco Laboratory, Connecticut Agricultural
Experiment Station.

‘

28 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
reagent B). Normally this precipitate does not interfere with the color
reactions and is due to the formation of calcium hydroxide in excess of
its solubility.

Boron *

Reagent A: Glycerine in a dropper bottle (A. R. or C. P. grade ana-
lyzed glycerol).

Reagent B: Triple Acid. This is prepared from chemically pure con-
centrated HCl, HeSO, and H3PO,4 (85%), using equal quantities of each.
First mix the HCl and H3POx,. then add the HeSO, slowly in the open
air, under a hood, or a short distance from a wall fan. The reaction is
apt to be violent if the sulfuric acid is added too quickly. A gentle
stirring with a clean glass rod will accelerate the “bubbling” period.
The reagent is ready to use when cooled. Store in a clean glass-stoppered
bottle, that previously has had a final rinsing with reagent B. The
stopper should be loosely fitted to allow gas formed to escape.

Reagent C: Tumeric tincture. An excess of tumeric powder is added to
95% ethyl alcohol. Shake at intervals for about % hour and filter.
Store in a dropper bottle.

Equipment: The glassware and spot plates used must be thoroughly
cleansed in hot water (and in weak HCl solution when new and later
occasionally) followed by distilled water. After air drying they should
be stored away in clean paper when not in use. A spot plate should be
used only once a day because even a small amount of moisture’ de-
tracts from the sensitivity of the acid.

Testing Procedure: A level teaspoon of soil is placed on the filter paper
in the vial. (The soil used should preferably be a fresh sample which
has not had an opportunity to air dry, having its original field moisture).
Ten ml of Morgan’s extracting solution is slowly (drop by drop at first)
added to the soil. Let drain completely. Flush the extract with the
inserted dropper pipette. Place 2 drops of the extract in DUPLICATE on
the special spot plate. It is important that size of drops be consistently
the same throughout the testing procedure. For blanks use 2 drops of
Morgan’s extracting solution (also in duplicate on the spot plate). In 3
more depressions place 2 drops of Morgan’s extracting solution in each,
to be used for wash basins. The dropper should deliver 18-19 drops per
ml. Add 1 drop of glycerine (reagent A) and 2 drops of the triple acid
(reagent B) to all depressions with solution and extracts in them. Add
1 drop of tumeric tincture (reagent C) to unknowns and to the blank,
but NOT to the wash basins.

Wash a dropper pipette by pumping the liquid up and down 2 or 3
times in the “wash basin”, successively in the first, second and third basin.
Repeat the process in the blanks and mix blanks 1 and 2 together. Pro-
1 Modified from the Morgan testing procedure by T. R. Swanback, Windsor Tobacco Laboratory,
Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station,

2 The plates should NOT be dried in an oven.

| Morgan Soil Testing System 29
ceed to unknowns and mix the duplicates. If rank is known, begin with
the weakest and operate towards the higher ones. If not known, rinse
: dropper in wash basins, and via blank proceed to unknowns.
: Add 1 more drop of triple acid (reagent B) to all COLORED de-
< pressions (thus not to the wash basins), mix and compare colors with
blank and standards. When the operator is familiar with the tests, it is
not necessary to run standards with each test.

Interpretation: A perceptible pink color (deviating from the blank *)
is indicative of sufficient boron. for plant growth, corresponding to 0.4-0.5
ppm of boron. A peach color indicates 1 ppm boron. Deeper pink colors
suggest surplus boron and are of interest for quality of product grown,
provided boron is not present in toxic concentrations.

Boron tests should be calibrated carefully on the basis of standards
prepared from boric acid dissolved in the Morgan soil extracting solution.

It has been noted that with soils giving high iron or aluminum tests
the boron test color may be erroneously in evidence, while high amounts
of nitrates tend to diminish the sensitivity of the test. Hence, if possible,
the boron test should be confirmed by employing a laboratory procedure,

such as the hot water extract method of Berger and Truog (2).
Zinc
, Reagent A: Dissolve 0.0807 g of cobalt chloride in 100 ml of 0.5 N
hydrochloric acid solution.

Reagent B: Dissolve 8 g of mercuric chloride and 9 g of ammonium
thiocyanate in 100 ml of distilled water. Let stand for 3 or 4 days and
decant the clear solution.

Reagent C: Ethyl ether.

Testing Procedure*: Place 1 level teaspoonful of soil in a 30 ml beaker.
Add the Morgan soil extracting solution slowly, a few drops at a time,
stirring the soil mass with a glass rod, until the soil is thoroughly wetted.
Add an additional 5 ml quantity of the soil extracting solution. Stir for
1 minute. Filter. Transfer 10 drops of the extract to a test vial. Add
4 drops of reagent A and 10 drops of reagent B. Shake thoroughly and
let stand for 2 minutes. Add 20 drops of reagent C. Shake gently and
let stand for 10 minutes. The appearance of a blue color at the film
of contact between the ether and the aqueous solution is evidence of
zinc. A barely perceptible film of blue indicates approximately 10 ppm

in the extract. Above about 25 ppm, a blue precipitate begins to ac-
cumulate in the bottom of the vial. The test should be compared with
those obtained from standard amounts of zinc as zinc acetate, dissolved
. in the Morgan soil extracting solution. It has not yet been possible to
1 The blank should contain not more than a bare trace of pink color. If a definite pink color
appears, it suggests that traces of boron may be present in the reagents, glassware or
spot plates, or too much acid used. Note carefully the size of dropper used,
2 Adapted from the method of Krumbholz and Sauchez (25).
:

30 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
calibrate the above amounts in the extract in terms of that which is
active in the soil, However, the presence of considerable zinc, thus
, shown, is evidence of the accumulation of harmful concentrations, as oc- :
casionally found in the vicinity of industrial plants processing zinc ore
or metal.
‘
Copper
Reagent: Dissolve 5 g of alphabenzoinoxime in 100 ml of ethyl al-
cohol (95%).
Testing Procedure*: Prepare the soil extract as for the zinc test. Trans-
fer 10 drops of the extract to the spot plate. Add 2 drops of the reagent.
Stir and let stand for 5 minutes. A barely perceptible trace of greenish
yellow color is observed when approximately 2 ppm of copper are present
in the extract. The color deepens in greenish hue with higher amounts,
being quite definite at 5 ppm; at 10 ppm, a good apple green color
is developed. Readings of the test should be calibrated against standard
amounts of copper as copper sulfate, dissolved in the Morgan soil ex-
tracting solution.
The copper test is especially useful in examining soils with consider-
able accumulations of spray residues.
Alternate Test for Copper *
Reagent A: Sodium fluoride, powdered.
Reagent B: Zinc acetate, 1% solution.
Reagent C: Ammonium mercury thiocyanate: Dissolve 8 g of mercuric
-chloride (HgCl2) and 9 g of ammonium thiocyanate (NH,CNS) in 100
ml of distilled water.
Standards: Standard copper solution containing 0.1% Cu++ or 1,000
ppm; weigh out 3.9281 g of cupric sulfate (CuSO4.5H2O) and dissolve
in 200 ml distilled water. When dissolved, make up to 1 liter with
distilled water.
By means of a calibrated pipette, prepare standards as follows:
Morgan Standard Copper
Extracting Solution Sulfate Solution Contains Cut+
mt — _ er
20.0 0.0 0)
19.9 0.1 5
19.8 0.2 10 :
19.6 0.4 20
19.4 0.6 30
19.2 0.8 40
19.0 1.0 50
18.8 1.2 60 :
18.6 1.4 70
18.4 1.6 80
1 Adapted from the method proposed by ‘Hosking (21). oo -
2 Adapted from the method by King (23).

Morgan Soil Testing System +31

These may be made up and stored in stoppered vials for future use.
All chemicals must be of C.P. grade or better.

Testing Procedure: Weigh out 10 g of recently air dried 20-mesh soil
and add 10 ml of Morgan’s extracting solution. Allow to stand for 5
minutes with frequent stirring. Filter. To the clear filtrate, add 0.2 or 0.3
ml of sodium fluoride (reagent A). Stir or pump several times with a
dropping pipette.

Measure out carefully, by means of a calibrated pipette, exactly 0.2
ml of each of the standards prepared as indicated in the above table
and place in separate depressions of a white porcelain spot plate. Do
likewise with the unknowns. To each add 4 drops of reagent B; next,
add 4 drops of reagent C. Stir each with a small glass rod and com-
pare the intensity of the violet color of each of the unknowns with that
produced by the standards.

Mercury

Reagent: Dissolve 0.1 g of s-diphenylcarbazide in 100 ml of ethyl al-
cohol (95%).

Testing Procedure’: Prepare the soil extract as for the zinc test.
Transfer 10 drops of the extract to the spot plate. Add 2 drops of the
reagent. Add 3 drops of sodium hydroxide solution (same as magnesium
reagent B). Stir and let stand for 1 minute. A pale salmon red, from
the indicator itself, is a negative test. A deep salmon red is observed
when approximately 5 ppm are present in the extract. The color is a
deep red at 10 ppm, violet red at 20 ppm, violet at 50 ppm, purple
at 100 ppm. Readings of the test should be calibrated against stan-
dard amounts of mercuric chloride dissolved in the Morgan soil ex-
tracting solution.

The mercury test is occasionally useful in revealing mercury accumu-
lations from fungicides containing this element. It confirms the indica-
tion of mercury in the phosphorus test, and is considerably more sensitive.

Lead

Reagent: Dissolve 0.05 g of dithizone in 100 ml of carbon tetra-chloride.
This should be freshly prepared, since most glass containers contaminate
the reagent after a few days of contact.

Testing Procedure*: Prepare the soil extract as for the zinc test.
Transfer 5 drops of the extract to the test vial. Squeeze out 1 drop of
the reagent upon the center of the liquid surface. The green colored
spot thus formed should remain undisturbed. Observe during a 2-minute
period. If the color of the spot remains green, no measureable amount of
lead is present in the extract. At approximately 10 ppm (in the extract),
an olive green hue develops in 2 minutes; at 20 ppm, the resultant
1 Adapted from the method of Feigl and Nouber (16). ied _

2 Adapted from the method of Fischer (17).

32 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
, color is olive brown; at 40 ppm - reddish brown; at 60 ppm - brick
red within 1 minute; at 100 ppm - brick red in one-half minute.

The lead test is useful in identifying soils treated with lead compounds
used in insect control, or soils contaminated with lead compounds as
residues from sprayed crops. It should be noted that with the reagent
used in the lead test, mercury compounds give a golden yellow color and
zinc salts give a cherry red color.

Arsenic

Reagent A: Concentrated sulfuric acid.

Reagent B: Granular zinc A.R. (low arsenic content).

Reagent C: Silver nitrate solution (2 g silver nitrate in 100 ml dis-
tilled water).

Testing Procedure’: Prepare the soil extract as for the zinc test.
Place a few grains of granular zinc in the bottom of a test vial. Add
5 drops of concentrated sulfuric acid. Add 10 drops of the soil extract.
Place a disc of filter paper, approximately 15 mm in diameter, over
the top of the test vial. Moisten the filter paper with 1 drop of silver
nitrate solution (chloride reagent). Shake the vial gently several times,
until gas bubbles are freely liberated. Let stand for 2 minutes. Ex-
amine the bottom side of the test paper disc. A faint yellowish or
silvery sheen, with no perceptible darkening, is a negative test, the slight
coloration resulting from other constituents that may be present. With
increasing amounts of arsenic, the test paper shows darker spots. The
test is sensitive to approximately 10 ppm in the extract.

The arsenic test is useful in studying arsenic accumulations and resi-
dues from insect control treatments, sprays and dusts.

Molybdenum *

Reagent A: Potassium xanthogenate (or xanthate) crystals*.

Reagent B: A saturated solution of potassium xanthate in potassium
thiocyanate (add sufficient potassium xanthate crystals to a 10% solution
of potassium thiocyanate to obtain a saturated solution). Usually 5 ml
is ample quantity to make at a time.

Reagent C: Hydrochloric acid, 1:1.

Testing Procedure: ‘Transfer 10 drops of the soil extract to the spot
plate and, for a blank, 10 drops of Morgan’s extracting solution. Add
a few crystals of reagent A and 1 drop of reagent C. Stir and watch
1 Adapted desi the Feigl “(15) sucditcetiens of the cages Guieuk ik
2 Adapted by T. R. Swanback from Feigl (15), p. 93.

3 Although potassium xanthate may be obtained from chemical supply houses, it can readily
be made in the laboratory out of ethyl alcohol, carbon disulfide and potassium hydroxide.
C,H,OH+CS,+KOH = KCS,C,H,O+H,O.

Theoretically, the required quantities are 26% C,H,OH, 42% CS, and 32% KOH.
Cont'd. p. 33

Morgan Soil Testing System 33
color development. The slightest purple deviation of color from the
blank indicates a trace of molybdenum, while a definite reddish blue
signifies more than a trace.

In dealing with very small amounts of Mo (i.e. less than 1 ppm)
the method may be made more sensitive by the following procedure:

To 10 drops of soil extract on the spot plate add 1 drop of reagent
B and 1 drop reagent C. Do the same with the blank (10 drops of
extracting solution).

A slight purple color appearing immediately upon adding the acid in-
dicates at least 4% ppm of Mo. The color soon disappears. With only
a faint pink color which quickly disappears, the molybdenum content
is about 0.25 ppm. ,

ADAPTATION OF THE MORGAN TESTS

TO PLANT TISSUE TESTING

The visible symptoms produced by serious deficiency or excess of a
given constituent are frequently recognizable in plants by the trained
observer. Such symptoms are well illustrated in a joint publication of
the American Society of Agronomy and the National Fertilizer Association
(1).

However, in the field the plant may suffer from deficiencies not suf-
ficiently severe to produce definite symptoms, and further, it may suffer
from combinations of several symptoms that are not readily identifiable.
During the past few years numerous investigators have found it desirable
to supplement quick tests of soils with similar tests conducted on fresh
plant tissue or plant tissue extracts. By so doing, it has been frequently
possible to verify cases of suspected crop deficiency or other nutrient
abnormality.

Methods for such testing have been described by a number of inves-
tigators (9, 10, 11, 19, 38, 45, 47 and others). Some of the methods
proposed are chiefly qualitative in character; some give semi-quantitative
results, while others are meant to provide reasonably quantitative data.
All three types are useful in their place.

Make a saturated alcoholic solution of KOH by adding an excess of KOH to ethyl alcohol,
let stand several hours with occasional shaking (standing overnight results in a discolored
solution).

Transfer 26 parts by volume of C,H,OH and 42 parts of CS, to a beaker, then add suf-
ficient KOH (alcoholic) solution to make an initial white precipitate at the bottom of the
beaker. If, upon stirring, a solid mass is produced, sufficient KOH has been added. After
settling, pour off the supernatant liquid, and wash the precipitate once with ether.

Stir thoroughly under a hood or close to an exhaust fan, with the material spread out on
a large watch glass. Dry overnight at room temperature in the dark.

After drying, break up lumps and mix thoroughly on wax paper, then transfer to an am-
ber colored bottle. The salt should be a light yellow color.

34 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
Sampling

Since one of the main objectives in tissue testing is to secure quick
results, the tests are always made on fresh plant material. A delay of
a day or two is permissable if the sample is held moist under refrigera-
tion. Because of the variability in composition with stage in growth,
variety, weather conditions, and innumerable other factors, the tests should
be made on a comparative basis, comparing abnormal with normal plants
sampled identically and simultaneously.

The portion to be sampled depends upon the character of the plant
and, in some instances, on the test to be made. For example, in testing
corn, nitrate tests are best made on the basal part of the stalk, phos-
phorus on the stalk near the tassel, and potassium on the leaf sheath
(10, 45). In the case of small grains, alfalfa, clover and similar crops,
the stems are used for all tests, as are the blades of grass. Either the
stems or the petioles are suitable for tests on beans, soybeans and po-
tatoes; and for carrots and beets, the petioles. Where only one element
is to-be determined, a choice of plant parts can be made as described
for the corn plant; for complete testing, it is sufficient to use the same
portion for all tests. The practice at this laboratory for these tests has
been to use the middle portion of the corn stalk, the stems of beans,
and the basal portion of the stems of potatoes.

I. Rapid Field Tests (chiefly qualitative *)

This method provides rough approximations of the amounts of nitrates,
phosphorus, potassium, calcium and magnesium in plant tissues, and is of
value only where abnormal plants or those having suspected deficiencies
or excesses are compared with normal plants. The reagents, for the most
part, are the same as those used in soil testing.

Nitrates

Either of the following reagents may be used.

Reagent A: Diphenylamine sulfuric acid. Dissolve 1 g of dipheny-
lamine in 100 ml of concentrated sulfuric acid.

Reagent B: Sulfanilic acid-alpha-naphthylamine powder mixture (5). The
mixture is prepared as follows:

(a) 100 g BaSO,4
(b) 10 g MnSO4.H2O
(c) 2 g finely powdered zinc
(d) 75 g citric acid
(e) 4 g sulfanilic acid
(f) 2 g alpha-naphthylamine
1A modification and adaptation from several methods (5, 34, 45). °

Morgan Soil Testing System 35

Grind any coarse materials to a fine powder. Mix b, ¢, e, and f sep-
arately with portions of the BaSOs. The whole, including a and d, is
then mixed thoroughly. Use care to have room, table tops, etc., free of
nitrate and nitrite. When stored in a fully blackened bottle, the re-
agent will keep several years.

Procedure for large leaves and stems: Apply a drop of reagent A to a
freshly exposed cut surface; or sprinkle a little of the powder (reagent B)
on the cut surface. Squeeze if necessary to wet the powder. With re-
agent A a deep blue color indicates an abundance of nitrates; with
reagent B, a bright pinkish red means high nitrates.

Procedure for small stems or grass blades: Cut the plant material with
a sharp knife or scissors into small pieces 4” or less. In the bottom
of a clean 20 or 30 ml beaker place either 1 drop of reagent A or a
small amount of reagent B (% to 34” on the wide end of a toothpick),
add some of the cut plant material and crush with the flattened end of
a stirring rod directly on the reagent. Examine the beaker from below
for color changes.

Phosphorus

To % teaspoon or less of cut plant material in a small beaker, add 2
or 3 eyedropperfuls (2 or 3 ml) of Morgan’s extracting solution, shake
well; add 2 to 4 drops of phosphorus reagent A (p. 20), and 4 to 6
drops of reagent B. Observe color of the suspension. A strong blue in-
dicates high phosphorus.

Potassium

Prepare plant material as for phosphorus. Add the Morgan extracting
solution, then 2 or 3 drops of potash reagent A (p. 21) and about
15 drops of reagent B (p. 21). Shake well. Observe density of pre-
cipitate as compared with samples containing little or no potash.

Magnesium

Prepare plant material as for phosphorus. Add the Morgan extracting
solution, then 2 drops of magnesium reagent A (p. 22) and about 6
drops of reagent B and shake well. To be sure of sufficient reagent, add
a drop or two more of reagent B. A red color indicates high magnesium.

Calcium
Prepare plant material as for phosphorus and add the Morgan extracting
solution. CRUSH the material well with the flattened end of a glass rod;

add 2 or 3 drops of the calcium reagent (10% sodium oxalate, p. 22).

Observe density of precipitate compared with a sample from which the

reagent has been omitted.

36 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
II. Semi-quantitative Rapid Tissue Tests

These tests differ from those previously described (34) chiefly in the
method of preparing the plant extract.

The sample is sliced thin with a razor blade or, in the case of grass
and clover, cut into short lengths (14”-1%4”) with scissors. After mix-
ing, 2.5 ml of the cut material (measured in an improvised container of
that capacity) is placed in a test tube, 7.5 ml of the Morgan extracting
solution (9 ml for grass) and up to % teaspoon of charcoal added, the
contents shaken vigorously for 1 minute, then filtered. The clear ex-
tract is then tested by the quick test methods described earlier in this
bulletin for soils, diluting wherever necessary. Readings are calculated
to parts per million of extract’.

Ill. Quantitative Tissue Tests

This method involves the use of the Waring blender for mincing the
plant material, and a photoelectric colorimeter for reading colors of true
solutions or opacity of suspensions. It is based on Wolf’s (47) mod-
ification of Morgan’s method. These procedures have been found to
give satisfactory results on the plants tested (potatoes, corn, beets, spin-
ach, beans, carrots and hybrid poplar petioles). The plant material is
treated with the Morgan extracting solution identical to that used in
soil testing, with the addition of activated charcoal (Darco G 60 or 97
or similar. grade) as a clarifying agent.

A set of standard curves must be prepared in advance as described by
Wolf (47). It is advisable to include a low and a high standard with
every batch of samples. The procedures given below are designed for
using shell vials (25 x 60 mm having a capacity of about 25 ml, and
marked at 10, 15 and 20 ml) in a Lange photometer.

Preparation of the Plant Extract”

Ten g of fresh plant material, 200 ml of the Morgan leaching solution,
and 4 teaspoon of charcoal are placed in a Waring blender and run for
3 to 5 minutes. Filter in 52 cm Buckner funnels with suction, using S&S
597 or Whatman No. 1 paper. Transfer filtrate to 125 ml Erlenmeyer
flasks. All aliquots are taken in duplicate.

Nitrates

Phenoldisulfonic Acid Method

Reagent A: Phenoldisulfonic acid. Dissolve 25 gm of pure white phenol
in 150 ml of concentrated sulfuric acid, add 75 ml of fuming sulfuric |
© Peni ee extn x3= Pa Te of pin sictiialiad aa all crops except grass. For
grass, ppm of extract x 3.6.

* Although the prepared extracts may keep several weeks or more in a refrigerator, some
of them tend to get cloudy in a day or two; hence, it is better to run the analyses as
promptly as possible, once the extrdcts have been prepared.

| aaa

Morgan Soil Testing System 37
acid (containing 13-15% of sulfur trioxide) and heat at 100°C for 2
hours (48).

Reagent B: Sodium hydroxide, 15%.

Reagent C: Ammonium hydroxide diluted with water (1:1).

Testing Procedure: Place 1 to 4 ml of extract in a 50 or 100 ml beaker;
add 2 or 3 drops of reagent B and evaporate to dryness on steam bath.
Cool, add % to 1 ml phenoldisulfonic acid, stir or rotate. After 5 to 10
minutes add about 5 ml water, then make alkaline with reagent C. Make
up to 20 ml with water. Read in the photoelectric colorimeter, using
the BLUE filter. (If too concentrated, dilute to 100 ml, mix, and place
20 ml or so into vial for reading).

Standards: Use 0.5 and 2 ml aliquots of a 10 ppm standard solution,
and proceed as described above.

Brucine Method

The brucine method can be used for plant tissue work if the aliquots
are kept low.

Reagent A: Brucine 5%. Dissolve 1 g ot brucine in 20 ml of chloro-
form.

Reagent B: Concentrated sulfuric acid, reagent grade, (sp. gr. 1.84).

Testing Procedure: Pipette 0.2 to 2 ml of the plant extract in vial,
dilute to 4 ml with Morgan’s extracting solution; place vials in a cold
water bath, add 0.2 ml (8 drops’) of brucine reagent and 8 ml of H»SO,
(slowly at first to prevent spattering*); mix thoroughly. After stand-
ing not less than 3 minutes nor more than 10, dilute to 20 ml with dis-
tilled water, mix thoroughly* and cool. Read in the colorimeter using
the blue filter. The color is stable for at least an hour. If too con-
centrated, repeat test with smaller aliquot. For the blank use 1 ml of
Morgan’s extracting solution.

Standards: Use 1 and 4 ml aliquots of a 1 ppm standard solution,
and proceed as described above.

Ammonia
Reagent A: Nessler’s solution (See p. 20).
Reagent B: Sodium silicate, 10%.
Testing Procedure: Place 1 or 2 ml of the plant extract in vial, add
4 or 5 ml of ammonia-free water, then 0.2 ml of 10% Na»SiO, (reason-
Lit takes 8 drops of chloroform to equal 2m.
*To avoid breakage of vials when the H,SO, is added, the following technique may be
necessary: Remove the vial from the water bath, hold over an evaporating dish (to catch
the solution if vial should break) and add the H,SO, from a burette, slowly at first, with
constant shaking or stirring. Then replace in water bath,

3A small motor mixer will be found helpful when a large number of samples are being run.

38 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
ably fresh), dilute to 20 ml with ammonia-free water, stir; add 1 ml
of Nessler’s solution. Read after 10 minutes using the BLUE (filter.
Consider 20 ml as total dilution. For the blank, use 1 ml of Morgan’s
extracting solution plus 19 ml of water.

Standards: Use 0.5 and 2 ml of a 10 ppm standard solution, and
proceed as described above.

Phosphorus

Reagent A: Dissolve 2.5 g of ammonium molybdate in 100 ml of 6 N
H2SO,4 (18 ml of concentrated H2SO, diluted to 100 ml).

Reagent B: Amino-naphthol-disulfonic acid. Dissolve 15 g of sodium
bisulfite (anhydrous) in 100 ml of distilled water. To this add 0.5 g of
pure, dry, 1 amino-2 naphthol-4 sulfonic acid, and 1.5 g sodium sulfite
(anhydrous). Shake, make up to 500 ml, and store in brown bottle.
(This solution is not good after it turns yellow).

Testing Procedure: Place 5 to 15 ml of the plant extract in vial;
dilute to 15 ml with Morgan’s leaching solution. Add 3 ml of am-
monium molybdate solution, and stir. Add 2 ml of amino-naphthol-sulfonic
acid, and stir. Read after 15 minutes using the YELLOW filter. Readings
over 80 (% of total extinction) are unreliable. Use 15 ml of Morgan’s
leaching solution for the blank.

Standards: Use 1 and 5 ml of a 10 ppm standard solution, and pro-
ceed as described above.

Potassium

Reagent A: Sodium cobaltinitrite. Prepared as described on p. 21
but in larger quantities (4 x).

Reagent B: Iso-propyl alcohol. To 900 ml of iso-propyl alcohol add
100 ml of neutral formaldehyde.

Testing Procedure: Place 0.5 to 2 ml of the plant extract in the vial
and dilute to 10 ml with the Morgan extracting solution. Add 1 ml of
sodium cobaltinitrite solution and stir. After 1 minute add 10 ml of
iso-propyl-alcohol (reagent B, preferably cold) slowly down one. side of
vial forming a layer of alcohol on top. In a few minutes rotate or stir’
slowly at first, then rapidly until thoroughly mixed. Read after 10 min-
utes using the YELLOW filter. If reading is 80 or more on the colori-
meter, repeat using a smaller aliquot. Use 10 ml of Morgan’s extracting
solution for the blank.

Standards: 1 and 5 ml of a 40 ppm solution and proceed as above.
This procedure should be rigidly adhered to in all cases.

1 Use a rubber tipped stirring rod to avoid scratching the glass.

Morgan Soil Testing System 39
Calcium

Reagent: Sodium oxalate, 2%, prepared fresh daily. Shake before using.
(It is possible to use an old solution made up at least a week in advance,
providing one always uses an old solution. One must not switch from a
fresh to an old solution or vice versa unless a separate set of curves
is prepared for each).

Testing Procedure: Place 1 to 5 ml of plant extract in the vial, dilute
to 20 ml with the Morgan extracting solution. Add 4 ml of the sodium
oxalate reagent, and stir; read after 15 minutes using the BLUE filter.
Use 20 ml of the Morgan extracting solution as a blank. Best readings
on the colorimeter are obtained between 5 and 45.

Standards: 1 and 4 ml of a 100 ppm solution.

Magnesium *

Reagent A: Dissolve 0.02 g of Thiazol yellow in 100 ml of water.
Store in an amber glass bottle.

Reagent B: Dissolve 20 g of hydroxylamine hydrochloride in water and
dilute to 100 ml.

Reagent C: Dissolve 5 g thiourea in 50 ml of water.

Reagent D: Sodium hydroxide, 2.5 N. Dissolve 100 g of NaOH in
water and dilute to 1 liter. Store in a Pyrex bottle or flask.

Reagent E: Starch - compensating reagent:

(a) Starch, 2%: To 2 g of C.P. soluble starch, add a
few drops of water and make into a paste. Add slowly
while stirring, 100 ml of boiling water (distilled). If
it is necessary to filter the solution, do so while hot through
a Whatman No. 31 paper. Prepare fresh daily.

(b) Compensating Solution: To 4.4 g Ca(C2H;02)2.H2O
and 0.37 g Ale(SO4)3.18 H2O in a 1-liter flask, add 10
ml of concentrated HCl and about 500 ml of water. Mix
and dilute to 1 liter with water.

(c) Mix equal volumes of (a) and (b).

Standard Solution: Dissolve 0.8815 g Mg(C2H3O02)2.4HzO in 1 liter of
Morgan’s extracting solution to obtain a 100 ppm solution. Diluting this
solution 1 to 5 with Morgan’s extracting solution provides a 20 ppm
standard.

Testing Procedure: Pipette 5 or 10 ml of plant extract into a vial,

! dilute to 10 ml with Morgan’s extracting solution. Add 2 drops ‘0.1 ml)
of reagent B, and stir; then 4 drops (0.2 ml of reagent C) and 4 ml of
the starch-compensating reagent E(c), and stir. Then add 2 ml of Thiazol
1Peech and English method (96), with slight modifications proposed by Mikkelsen and Toth

(27).

40 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
yellow and, after stirring, 4 ml of NaOH solution; mix thoroughly. Read
in the colorimeter, using the GREEN filter. The color is constant for
an hour or more. Use 10 ml of Morgan’s extracting solution for the
blank. Readings above 70 on the colorimeter are less reliable.

Standards: Use 1 and 4 ml of a 20 ppm solution, and proceed as
described above..

Calculations
Determine ppm in the solution as read, then calculate to determine
concentration in the plant, as follows:
ppm of total ml of extracting solution *
solution xX dilution’ x aliquot (ml)
Pp. ht ht SS eee
g of plant material
200
040 X 20 X 4
eg. ———-——_———— = 0.40 X 100 = 40 ppm
10
200
Bo x21 2
eg. ———_—————_ = 8.2 X 210 = 1722 ppm
10
QUANTITATIVE CALIBRATION OF TEST CHARTS

Color charts for reading concentrations of various elements found in
the soil extract are given in the Appendix of this bulletin °*.

These charts were based initially on the assumption that when 10 ml
of Morgan’s extracting solution is percolated through the soil, a given
constituent is extracted in a fairly definite ratio to the total amount that
could be extracted by a series of repeated extractions. On this basis,
the first extraction approximates the following percentages of the total
amount thus extractable:

1 Total volume (ml) of the solution in the vial used in the colorimeter.

2 Amount of Morgan’s extracting solution used in the preparation of the plant extract.

3The assistance of Mrs. Marion Kirk in the preparation of the color charts is gratefully
acknowledged.

Morgan Soil Testing System 41
Constituent Per Cent Extracted
Nitrate nitrogen -- 80
Ammonia nitrogen _ 50
Phosphorus _ 4
Potassium -- 50
Calcium _ 50
Magnesium — 50
Aluminum — 10
Manganese -- 20
Tron -- 20
Sulfur _— 80
Nitrite nitrogen _— 80
Sodium — 60
Chlorides -— 80

In connection with the foregoing percentages, it is of interest to note
that practically all of the nitrate and similar water-soluble constituents
are removed by 4 successive extractions. The exchangeable bases, such
as potassium, calcium and magnesium, are obtained in 6 or 7 portions.
On the other hand, the phosphorus concentration of the second extract is
usually slightly higher than the first. Successive extractions diminish
only slightly in phosphorus content, even up to the twentieth portion.
Aluminum and iron diminish slowly in concentration for 6 or 7 extrac-
tions, and thereafter remain practically constant, with definite amounts
of these constituents proportional to the amount in the first extract.

In Bulletins 372 and 392 (32, 33) these relationships were used to
calculate the number of pounds per acre to plow depth that would be
represented by the test. Such an expression of results provides a helpful
concept in evaluating the magnitude of the test, but has been frequently
misused, or applied too literally, in the interpretation of results by some
soil testing laboratories using these methods. In Bulletin 450 (34) it
was replaced by a Relative Test Index scale of 1 to 10. For general
use, this appears to be preferable as it eliminates the objection cited
above and simplifies comparisons between tests. In this bulletin the
number of colors has been reduced to four (Relative Test Index Numbers
2, 4, 6, 8). However, to meet the need in certain situations and for the
benefit of those who are accustomed to think in terms of specific con-
centrations, the results are expressed in parts per million (ppm) as well
as in the arbitrary units of 2 to 8. Doubling the ppm approximates the
pounds per acre on a plow depth basis (6-7 inches).

Composite Solution Standards for the Calibration of the Charts

The color and turbidity charts given in this bulletin are the results
of the best efforts of the engraver and printer. However, it is very
difficult to obtain exact color reproductions by the photo-engraving pro-
cess. It is desirable to check them with solutions containing various
concentrations representing the ranges of sensitivity of the tests. Further-
more, there may be those who wish to extend the limits of the charts,
ie. include very low (relative index 1) and very high (relative index 10).

: f

42 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
The following scheme empioys a series of single stock solutions for
each of the constituents in the routine tests. These are combined in a
series of three mixed stock solutions which may be kept ready for reference
at any time. The mixed stock solutions are combined and diluted in
varying proportions in order to furnish convenient quantities for immediate
comparisons. (Calculations from the exact concentrations employed,
through the successive mixtures and dilutions, should not be used in an
exact quantitative sense when such a mixed standard is employed).

1. Prepare separate solutions for each constituent, dissolving quanti-
ties of the C.P. chemical shown in the following table in 100 mil of the
Morgan soil extracting solution:

Concentration
of

Chemical G per constituent
Constituent formulae 100 ml ppm
Nitrate Nitrogen NaNOs 0.182 300
Ammonia Nitrogen (NH4,)2SO. 0.473 1,000
Phosphorus NaH:PO,. H:O 0.036 80
Potassium KCl 0.191 1,000
Calcium Ca(C2HsO2)}2. HO 6.599 15,000
Magnesiun Mg(CzHsO2)2. 4H20 0.441 500
Aluminum AICls. 6H20 0.448 500
Manganese MnSO,. 4H:0 0.162 400

2. Prepare three mixed stock solutions from the above separate so-

lutions:
Mixed Stock Solution A
20 ml of NOs-N_ ( 300 ppm)
10 ml of NH«-N_ (1,000 ppm)
10 ml of P ( 80 ppm)
10 ml of Mg ( 500 ppm)
Mixed Stock Solution B
10 ml of K ( 1,000 ppm)
10 ml of Ca (15,000 ppm)
30 ml of Morgan’s soil extracting solution
Mixed Stock Solution C
10 ml of Al (500 ppm)
10 ml ot Mn (400 ppm)
30 ml of Morgan’s soil extracting solution

For ready use, the above solutions may be kept in 2-ounce dropper
bottles.

3. To calibrate the charts, set up a series of 6 one-half ounce glass
vials, numbered to correspond to the Rating Index Numbers. A 10 ml
mark should be made on each vial.

Morgan Soil Testing System 43

The amounts of the three mixed stock solutions’ to be added to each
vial are as follows, in drops:

Relative Test Index 1 2 4 6 8 10

Mixed Stock Solution A 1 3 6 12 18 30

Mixed Stock Solution B 8 14 20 25 30 35

Mixed Stock Solution C 1 3 6 12 18 30

Make up the contents of each vial to the 10 ml mark with Morgan’s
extracting solution. Mix thoroughly. Test for each constituent as usual,
except for Al, when 4 drops, undiluted, should be tested.

The special tests may be calibrated with appropriate solution standards
prepared from pure salts dissolved in the extracting solution and diluted
to their proper range of sensitivity.

APPLICATION OF TESTS TO DRAINAGE WATER FROM

SOILS, IRRIGATION WATERS, ETC.

It is frequently desirable to obtain a rough picture of the relative
amounts of various soluble chemical constituents in the drainage water
from soils, water used for irrigation purposes, or from springs, wells and
streams. The tests used for soil extracts can be applied for this purpose,
although a few adjustments are required to compensate for the poor
buffer action of such dilute solutions. Toluene, sometimes added to stop
bacterial action, must not be used on samples to be tested. The modifi-
cations are indicated below for the various routine and special tests that
are thus affected.

Ammonia nitrogen: Use only 1 drop of the test reagent.

Phosphorus: Use only 5 drops of the water, adding 5 drops of the Morgan
soil extracting solution. Use only 1 drop of reagent B.

Calcium: Add 2 drops of the Morgan extracting solution to 10 drops of
the water and mix before adding the test reagent.

Magnesium: Add 5 drops of the Morgan extracting solution to 10 drops
of the water and mix before adding the test reagents. Use only 2 drops
of reagent B (15% NaOH) in developing the test.

Aluminum: Use 4 drops of the water, add 1 drop of the Morgan ex-
tracting solution and mix before adding the test reagent.

Manganese: Add 1 drop of 1:3 acetic acid (1 part glacial acetic acid
to 3 parts of distilled water) to 10 drops of the water and mix before
adding the reagents.

Copper: Add 2 drops of the Morgan extracting solution to 10 drops of
the water and mix before adding the reagent.

Carbonates: Place 2 ml of the water in a test vial that has been very
thoroughly rinsed with distilled water. Add 1 drop of phenolphthalein
indicator (prepared by dissolving 0.5 g of phenolphthalein powder

4Inasmuch as Stock Solution C tends to interfere with the magnesium test, it is better to
test C separately.

44 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
in 50 ml of ethyl alcohol and diluting to 100 ml). A pink to red color
indicates the presence of carbonates. Add standard KHSO, solution
(0.034 g of potassium acid sulfate dissolved in 100 ml of distilled water),
drop by drop, until the pink color entirely disappears, after shaking.

Each drop thus required is equivalent to 50 parts of carbonate (COs) ;
per million in the water tested.

In case it is desired to estimate bicarbonates (HCOs), add 1 drop of methyl
orange indicator (0.1 g methyl orange in 50 ml ethyl alcohol diluted to 100
ml with distilled water), and continue the addition of KHSQ, solution, drop
by drop, until the yellow orange color changes to reddish orange. Each drop
of KHSO, solution required, not including the amount required to decolorize
the phenolphthalein, is equivalent to approximately 75 parts of bicarbonate
(HCOs) per million in the water tested.

The other tests (NOs-N, K, Fe, S, NOs-N, Na, Cl, B, Zn, Hg, Pb, As)
are conducted exactly as previously described in the section on soil extract
testing, and including very low and very high readings (beyond the limits
of the color charts).

Quantitative estimations in water tests: It is possible within the range
of sensitivity of the test to make a fair estimate of the concentration
of the various soluble constituents in water thus tested. Results are
suitably expressed in terms of parts per million. The following table in-
dicates the approximate amounts thus indicated, based on the use of the
charts or described colors.

TABLE 3. APPROXIMATE QUANTITATIVE INDICATIONS IN WATER TESTS
Relative Test Index Number

Constituent 1 2 4 6 8 10

ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm = ppm

Nitrate nitrogen 0.3 0.9 1.8 3 6 12

Ammonia nitrogen | 3 5 10 20 40

Phosphorus 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.9 2.9 4.8

Potassium 8 14 20 24 28 32

Calcium 100 150 200 300 400 500

Magnesium 0.5 1 2 5 10 20

Aluminum 0.5 1 2 5 10 20

Manganese (A and

B reagents only) 0.5 1 2 4 8 16

Tron 1.5 3 5 10 25 50

Sulfate sulfur 50 100 200 300 400 600

Nitrite nitrogen 0.5 il 2 4 6 10

Sodium 120 180 240 360 480 600

Chlorine 25 50 100 200 400 800

Boron Sensitivity range: 2 to 50 parts per million ns

Zinc ” ” 5 to 50 ”» » ”

Copper ” ” 2 to 25 ” ” ”

Mercury ”» ” 5 to 100 ” ” ”»

Lead » ” 10 to 100 ” ” ”»

Arsenic ” ” 10 to 100 ” ” “i

Neen eee ee ee

Morgan Soil Testing System 45

ADAPTATION OF QUICK TESTS TO SALINE OR ALKALI SOILS

The method of soil extraction with an acetic acid-sodium acetate buffer
solution, such as employed in the Morgan Soil Testing System, is primarily
adapted to soils of humid regions, containing relatively low amounts of
water-soluble salts, and either acid or only slightly alkaline (below 8.2
pH) in reaction.

Saline or white alkali soils contain large amounts of water-soluble salts,
such as the chlorides and sulfates of sodium, magnesium, and calcium.
When the salt concentration is fairly high (3,000 ppm or more), a
mixture of the soil with distilled water - for instance, 1 level teaspoonful
per 10 ml of distilled water - is sufficiently flocculated by the presence
of the salts to yield a clear water extract upon filtration. However, if
the salt concentration is low, or if the soil is deflocculated by the presence
of alkali carbonate, a clear water extract is not obtained.

A suitable procedure for obtaining clear, colorless extracts of soils
that may be reliably tested for the common alkali or saline constituents
is as follows:

Place 1 teaspoonful of the soil in a 30 ml beaker. Add 10 ml of dis-
tilled water to which from 1 to 5 drops of a neutral 1% copper acetate
solution has been added. (Heavy soils low in salts require more copper
acetate to effect clarification. Use no more than is actually necessary to
give a clear filtrate). Stir thoroughly for 1 minute, and filter through a
paper of the quality used in the usual procedure.

The extract may be subjected to various tests following the techniques
recommended for drainage waters, etc. The copper test, of course, can-
not be included. The most useful tests are those for chlorides, sulfates,
nitrates, sodium, calcium, magnesium and potassium.

Soils high in sodium and potassium carbonates are known as_ black
alkali soils. The carbonates dissolve and disperse the organic matter
which diffuses through the soil and colors it dark brown or black. Black
alkali soils yield extracts showing the presence of soluble carbonates by
the phenolphthalein indicator. However, a pH test of the soil should
be employed to confirm the presence of alkali. (Black alkali soils are
indicated by pH tests above 8.5).

THE INTERPRETATION OF SOIL TESTS

Soil test data should be considered with reference to the limiting ef-
fects on crop growth that may be expected from other factors, such
as the following: poor aeration or restricted root system caused by un-
desirable soil structure or soil tilth, deficient drainage, low organic matter

content, unfavorable seasonal conditions, plant pests, and plant diseases.
Irrespective of the chemical fertility of the soil, the crop expectation is
less than normal when one or more of these factors is in operation. It
is impracticable to seek to attain the most desirable tests on soils other-
wise restricted in productive capacity.

46 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541

The economic productive level of the crop under consideration deter-
mines to a marked degree the extent to which one can afford to build up
the fertility level of the soil. Fertilizers. can be profitably applied in
much larger amounts for crops capable of giving high net returns per
acre’. This is conspicuously true of intensive vegetable crops, tobacco
or potatoes, as contrasted with corn, small grain, hay and similar crops.

Soil tests should be compared in the light of past practices with respect
to fertilizers, manures and lime. Many obvious correlations may be observed.
On the other hand, when the soil treatment has been so favorable as to
justify an expectation of relatively high ratings for phosphorus, potas-
sium and calcium, and a low test for aluminum, the explanation for less
desirable tests should be sought, giving consideration to the fixing power
of the soil and the degree of exhaustion of available constituents that
could be accomplished by crop withdrawal.

Some tests, notably those for nitrate and ammonia nitrogen, depend
upon temporary conditions*, such as the activities of soil micro-organ-
isms, seasonal effects (abnormally wet and dry periods) and amount of
leaching that has been going on. A test may be given much weight, or
entirely disregarded, depending upon weather or other environmental con-
ditions and cropping practices which may have accentuated the soil con-
ditions in question.

The interrelation of various quick tests and the pH test should be
especially considered. Chemical soil fertility is best estimated from a
study of the composite pattern thus presented.

No definite limits for favorable or unfavorable soil tests can be set
for a given constituent, even for a particular crop, which will apply
under all conditions. Sound judgment, thorough agronomic training and
much experience in the applying of the results of soil tests on soils of
known performance are all essential to the diagnostic interpretation of
soil tests in terms of soil management practices.

The practical value of the tests is limited chiefly by the qualifications
of the person who is responsible for translating the data into amounts and

' kinds of fertilizers, manures, lime and other soil amendments or treat-
ments that are most likely to be effective in promoting profitable crop
production.

A laboratory technician who can follow simple chemical routines can be
easily and quickly trained to make the tests described in this bulletin.
For best results he should be given constant guidance and supervision.
But if poor soil samples are submitted to the laboratory, poor results
may be expected. The best laboratory technique is not a substitute for
carefully taken samples. ‘
1In the Connecticut Valley, for example, profitable applications of as much as 200 pounds

per acre of nitrogen, 120 pounds of phosphorus (P,O,) and 200 pounds per acre of potash

are made to tobacco (Shade, broadleaf, Havana seed).
2Large quantities of ammonia develop soon after fertilization of tobacco fields.

Morgan Soil Testing System 47

Soil test interpretations are based upon experience obtained in apply-
ing soil test results to many hundreds of actual cases and to soils that
have been exhaustively studied both by laboratory analyses and by crop
responses to various treatments in greenhouse and field experiments. At
this Station, experience has been obtained from thousands of soils tested,
chiefly on Connecticut soils, and on many experiments that have been
conducted in the greenhouse and field. Such experimentation is continu-
ing in one form or another to test new ideas on soil and plant tissue
testing.

In previous bulletins (31, 32, 33, 34) details pertaining to general
soil test interpretations were included in the last section. Since inter-
pretations worked out for Connecticut cannot be used extensively else-
where, they have been omitted from this publication. Helpful informa-
tion on plant nutrient requirements and interpretations for soil and crop
testing are available elsewhere (1, 10, 20, 22, 24, 29, 35, 42). For those
interested, it is suggested that reference be made to these excellent pub-
lications.

Soil Reaction (pH) Tests

As previously stated, pH tests do not directly indicate lime needs.
The amount of lime required to change a soil from a given pH value
to a higher, less acid-indicating one, depends not only upon the change

TABLE 4. SOIL LIME-REQUIREMENT GROUPS SEPARATED ON THE BASIS OF
TEXTURE, ORGANIC MATTER AND CATION EXCHANGE CAPACITY
Organic
Matter
Content Cation
Lime Textural Approximate Exchange
Soil Group Requirement Class Per Cent Capacity +
I Very Low Loamy sand 2-4
4-6
1 Y Sandy loam 1-3
Il Low Loamy sand 5-7
i J Sandy loam 4-6 7-10
Fine sandy loam 2-4
Ill Medium Sandy loam 7-10
V v Fine sandy loam _—5-7 | 11-15
Loam 3-5
IV High Fine sandy loam eed |
v v Loam 6-8 | 16-20
Clay loam 3-6
1 Milligram equivalents per 100 g of soil.

48 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
in pH to be effected, but also upon the cation exchange capacity of
the soil, chiefly as related to the organic matter and clay content of
the soil within a given region. For example, the soils of Connecticut
may be roughly classified into four groups, as shown in Table 4.

The degree of pH adjustment in the positive direction that is de-
sirable depends upon the minimum pH at which the crop will give nor-
mal production on an otherwise favorable soil. Crops vary considerably
in their range of adjustment to varying pH levels. Tolerant soil acidity
ranges for practically all crops grown are given in tabular form by
Hester and Shelton (19), Small (40), and Spurway (41).

Soils with low to very low magnesium tests should be limed with dolo-
mitic (magnesian) lime if the pH test indicates that lime is needed. If
the pH is sufficiently high so as not to require lime, magnesium should
be used as magnesium sulfate or “double manure salts’.

If the calcium is very low, and the magnesium test is very high, the
liming preferably should be in the form of a “‘high-calcic” material.

Conditions Indicated by Various Quick Tests
Nitrogen Tests (ammonia, nitrite and nitrate)

Nitrogen -exists in the soil largely in the form of partially decomposed
organic residues containing proteins. Micro-organisms (bacteria and fungi)
gradually transform this nitrogen into ammonia compounds. Organic ni-
trogenous fertilizer materials and leguminous crop residues are more readily
attacked due to their high protein content. Urea and cyanamid are fer-
tilizer materials that can be rapidly hydrolyzed to produce ammonia
compounds, while nitrogen in the ammonia form is directly supplied in
fertilizers containing sulfate of ammonia, ammoniated phosphates, or am-
monium nitrate.

Nitrogen in ammonium compounds under certain conditions may be
utilized as such by many plants, especially during their early growth,
thus consuming the supply as indicated by the test. However, the chief
reason the ammonia test fails to reveal more than small amounts pre-
sent under normal field conditions is due to the rapid change of am-
monia to nitrites and nitrates by bacterial activity. The change to ni-
trates is usually rapid in comparison with that of the earlier stages of ©
nitrogen transformation. Therefore, only a few weeks after fertilizer ap-
plications supplying ammonia have been made, little or no ammonia ni-
trogen and no nitrite can be identified by the tests. Except during a
short period after such fertilizer treatment, a substantial ammonia test ;
is an indication of unfavorable conditions for nitrification, such as high
acidity, excessive or deficient moisture supply, or other disorders.

Inasmuch as a high content of ammonia may affect the potassium test,
it is particularly desirable to test for ammonia whenever an unusually
high potassium test is obtained. :

Nitrites are rarely found except as a temporary condition occasionally
resulting from a very heavy nitrogenous fertilizer treatment which was

Morgan Soil Testing System 49
not well mixed into the soil, especially under poor soil aeration resulting
from excess moisture. Nitrite tests in more than trace amounts should
be considered as harmful. Instances of severe injury to plant growth
have been noted on soils showing medium to high readings.

Nitrate nitrogen, whether formed in the soil through nitrification of
ammonia derived from organic residues and fertilizer materials, or di-
rectly supplied in the fertilizer, (viz., nitrate of soda), is rapidly as-
similated by the roots of living plants and may be readily lost from the
soil by the percolating action of heavy rains. Hence, high tests for nitrate
nitrogen in field soils are to be expected only when the root system of
the crop is not yet fully developed *.

High tests indicate a large reserve of readily available nitrogen for
the use of the crop. Rapidly growing annual crops require a large reserve
during the period of most active growth. The gradual processes of ni-
trogen liberation are rarely sufficiently rapid to meet their requirements
at that time. Crops with perennial root systems, such as sod grasses, shrubs
and trees, take up nitrogen through a much longer period of the year, and
low nitrate tests do not necessarily indicate a lack of available nitrogen.

Low tests are to be expected at the end of the cropping period, during
winter and early spring, and after a period of heavy rainfall. Under
such conditions, when all other factors are favorable, the absence of
nitrates may not necessarily indicate poor availability of soil nitrogen,
but the crop is apt to respond to the addition of a readily available ni-
trogenous fertilizer.

Abnormally high nitrate nitrogen tests are occasionally encountered in
greenhouse and other intensively fertilized soils, and suggest possible in-
jury to the crop due to an excessive concentration of the nitrate salts.
Such a condition may be corrected by leaching the soils with large amounts
of water, provided the soil does not contain too much clay.

Thus, the nitrogen tests may either be given much significance or
practically disregarded, depending upon whether or not conditions are
favorable to the development of an accumulation of these mobile con-
stituents. :

Since factors other than the soil test are usually important in assess-
ing the amount of available nitrogen that is likely to be supplied by the
soil during the active growing period of the crop, it is helpful to recognize
soil characteristics and management practices that are usually involved
in rating a given soil as to its potential fertility. They may be grouped
into the following Nitrogen Availability Classes:

I - High: Liberal manure applications (such as 15-25 tons of stable
manure) within a few months preceding the crop; unusually favorable
amount of soil organic matter, as indicated by a dark soil color, provided
the soil is well drained and not strongly acid; high to very high nitrate
nitrogen soil tests.

1 Except tobacco, where relatively high tests of NO,-N are desirable.

50 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
Il - Medium High: Light manure applications (8-14 tons of stable
manure) within a few months preceding the crop; a large green manure
or a heavy clover or alfalfa sod plowed under; medium to medium high ‘
organic matter, as indicated by medium dark soil color; favorable drain-
age conditions; medium high nitrate nitrogen soil tests.
III - Medium: Average cultivated cropping conditions, or with grass
sod plowed under or undisturbed grass sod as in pastures and lawns; loamy
soil texture, with fair organic matter content; medium nitrate nitrogen
soil tests.
IV - Low: Cultivated crops on sandy soils of relatively low organic
content; low to very low nitrate nitrogen soil tests.
Phosphorus Test

Phosphorus occurs in unfertilized and virgin soils in slowly soluble
mineral and organic combinations. It is a component of all mixed fertili-
zers, and is frequently applied alone as superphosphate or bone meal.

Under high levels of fertilization, in excess of 500 pounds per acre per
year of fertilizers containing 8 per cent or more of phosphoric acid (P20s5),
crops remove less phosphorus than is applied to the soil. This element
is not leached out of the soil. In soils only moderately acid, applied
phosphates remain for long periods in a fairly available form. On highly
acid soils, containing much active aluminum and iron, phosphorus com-
bines with these compounds to form aluminum and iron phosphates which
are largely unavailable to plants. At low rates of fertilization, the amount
of phosphorus applied results in little or no accumulation, and there
may be a net loss when only small amounts of manure or fertilizer are
used. When such a soil receives little or no lime, low phosphorus avail-
ability is a common condition.

The phosphorus test indicates the level of the more readily available
phosphorus in the soil, either native or as a residue from previous ap-
plications. Crops show marked differences in their capability to thrive
at the different degrees of phosphorus availability shown by this test.
Most market garden crops, potatoes, tobacco, and many legumes require
applications of phosphatic fertilizers unless tests show high amounts of
available phosphorus. Many soils showing only medium tests grow good
grass, hay, corn, oats, and alsike clover with very little phosphorus fer-
tilization, if otherwise in a fertile state. Low or trace readings indicate
the necessity for proportionally high amounts of phosphoric acid in the
fertilizer, depending upon the crop grown.

The active phosphorus content of the soil is a fairly stable property, é
except as affected by recent fertilizer application. Soils which have re-
ceived applications of arsenical materials may give high tests, regardless
of their phosphorus content. Hence, results in such cases are subject
to question. ,

At a given level of phosphorus availability, high pH values (5.6 or
above) tend to increase the test reading. On the other hand, at high
degrees of acidity (below pH 5.0), considerable amounts of slowly avail-
able aluminum and iron phosphates may be present in soils giving low

Morgan Soil Testing System 51
tests. Reasonable allowance should be made for this factor, especially on
soils known to have received considerable amounts of phosphorus in fer-
tilizer applications in recent years.

The following conditions are usually considered in determining the
Phosphorus Availability Classes:

I - High: Liberal applications of complete fertilizers for several years,
especially on a sandy soil; a slight degree of acidity; a low aluminum
soil test; high to very high phosphorus soil test.

II - Medium High: Moderate applications of complete fertilizers for
several years; light loam or sandy loam texture; moderate to slight acidity ;
a medium aluminum soil test; medium high phosphorus soil test.

Ill - Medium: Light, infrequent fertilizer applications; a strong degree
of acidity; a medium to high aluminum soil test; medium phosphorus soil
test.

IV - Low: No fertilizers on previous crops; a loam, silt loam or clay
loam soil; a very strong degree of acidity; a high or very high aluminum
soil test; low to very low phosphorus soil test.

Potassium Test

Potassium occurs in soils in large amounts in the form of rock minerals
that are difficult to dissolve. Their gradual decomposition liberates small
quantities of potassium which are loosely combined with colloidal material
(clay and humus) capable of being displaced into the soil solution by
cation exchange reactions.

Potassium may be added to the soil in fertilizers containing potash,
or as manures or crop residues, and is largely transferred into the ex-
changeable form. Some potassium is removed from the soil by leaching,
especially in cultivated and liberally fertilized soils.

The active potassium of the soil, best capable of nourishing the crop,
is that which exists in exchangeable form, or in true solution. Quick
tests indicate such supplies of this constituent.

Active potassium may be removed from the soil more rapidly than it
is replenished by natural processes. Thus, tests may be lower at the
end of the growing season especially after a crop having high potash
requirements, than where the soil has been fallow or supporting little vege-
tation for several months. Hence, most reliable tests are obtained in
the spring, prior to fertilization.

In soils which have been liberally treated with potassium fertilizers,
a portion of the potassium may become fixed in a non-exchangeable form
and thus not recoverable by the methods of extraction described in this
bulletin. Such forms, however, are more available to the crop than is the
potassium in native soil minerals. Reasonable allowance for this factor
should be made.

The following conditions are usually considered in determining the
Potassium Availability Classes:

52 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541

I - High: Heavy applications of complete fertilizers, supplying from
120 to 200 pounds of potash per acre annually, or heavy treatment with
manure of good quality; a loamy soil texture; calcium or magnesium soil
tests not unusually high in relation to the potassium soil test; high to
very high potassium soil test.

II - Medium High: Moderate applications of complete fertilizers, sup-
plying from 40 to 100 pounds of potash per acre during recent years; fair
applications of manure of good quality; intensive cropping; a medium heavy
soil texture; medium high potassium soil test.

III - Medium: Intensive cropping, irrespective of past fertilizer treatment
or under average cropping, with little or no fertilizer or manure, or with
manure of poor quality (badly leached); medium to low potassium soil
test.

IV - Low: No fertilizer or manure; very sandy soil texture; low to very
low potassium soil test.

Calcium Test

Calcium in soils occurs in the form of undecomposed carbonates (in
calcareous soils), rock minerals, as exchangeable calcium (adsorbed by the
soil colloids) and as soluble calcium salts. Acid soils contain no carbonates
and little exchangeable calcium. However, many soils which show a
considerable degree of acidity by pH tests may have a fair amount of
exchangeable calcium. This is especially true of soils high in organic
matter or active mineral colloids. In many cases the calcium test is a
better indication of lime needs than is the pH test.

Soils with high and very high calcium tests contain adequate amounts
of calcium for all crops. Usually they do not respond to liming unless
a high active aluminum concentration is indicated. Medium calcium tests
on soils near the neutral point may be expected on light sandy soils,
but a medium test on acid soils calls for lime if alfalfa, sweet clover and
lime-loving vegetable crops are to be grown. A low calcium test on
soils with a high aluminum test is a certain indication of a need for lime
for all except the most acid-tolerant plants, such as blueberries, straw-
berries, or ericaceous shrubs. When a_ trace reading is obtained, lime
should be used in liberal amounts for most crops, except in those cases
where such treatment intensifies disease injury.

Certain disease-producing soil organisms seem to be closely related to
the available calcium in the soil, in relation to the other bases, especially
potassium and magnesium. Thus, club root of cabbage is made less severe
by increasing the calcium supply. Physiological root disturbances, such
as the brown root rot of tobacco (caused by soil nematodes), are fre-
quently favored by calcium deficiency. On the other hand, the black root
rot of tobacco and the scab organism which attack potato tubers become
more troublesome on soils with higher relative amounts of calcium.

It must be borne in mind that, unless all other tests are satisfactory,
heavy liming may produce an unbalanced soil condition. Thus, liming
has frequently proven injurious on many sandy soils, especially in the
southern United States, which are deficient also in other elements such
as magnesium, manganese, potassium or iron. Excessive applications of

Morgan Soil Testing System 53
lime may depress the availability of boron in the soil, especially for
crops requiring high amounts of soluble boron. Deficiencies of boron and
manganese in soils are accentuated by liming treatment.

) Magnesium Test

Magnesium occurs in soils in the following forms: dolomitic carbonates,
unweathered minerals, exchangeable magnesium adsorbed by soil colloids,
and soluble magnesium salts. '

High and very high tests for magnesium are obtained from calcareous
soils derived from dolomitic limestones, and from moderately acid soils
resulting from the weathering of rocks high in ferro-magnesium minerals.
Medium tests are more common on soils of moderate acidity, on calcareous
soils from high calcic limestones, or on soils which have been moderately
limed with material of dolomitic origin. Soils which have been fertilized
over a period of years with acid-forming fertilizers containing no magnesium
produce soils low in magnesium. Low tests are common on acid soils,
and very low or negative tests may occur on strongly acid soils. This is
particularly true of sandy soils. In such cases a carrier of magnesium
should be applied in the form of dolomitic lime.

On soils giving high calcium and trace magnesium readings, or where
pH values are as high as desired for the crop, magnesium sulfate or
other neutral magnesium compound may be used to supply magnesium
without sweetening the soil. Commercial fertilizers thus formulated are
now on the market.

Aluminum Test

Aluminum occurs in large amounts in all soils, in the form of unde-
composed minerals and in the inorganic colloidal material. In neutral,
slightly acid or slightly alkaline soils, the element is in inert combin-
ations that have no direct effect upon plant growth. At greater degrees
of acidity, aluminum becomes active, capable of combining as soluble
salts, and may exert an adverse effect upon the growth of many plants,
especially those which are benefited. by liming when grown on acid soils.

A high or very high test is indicative of an undesirably acid soil, upon
which acid-sensitive crops are almost certain to fail. A medium test. is
not serious, especially with grasses, corn, oats, potatoes and tobacco.
A low or negative test is desirable, except for distinctly acid-tolerant plants.
Manganese Test

Manganese occurs in small amounts in all soils, chiefly in relatively
insoluble combinations. In some calcareous soils and acid soils that have
been heavily limed, practically no manganese is present in active forms,
and some crops are unable to obtain even the small amounts necessary
to meet their requirements. Poor growth and a yellow, chlorotic con-
ditions results.

54 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
On the other hand, strongly acid soils may contain injurious concen-
trations of active manganese compounds. Under such conditions liming -
is a corrective measure.
Manganese is changed by oxidation to less active forms, or may be
leached from the soil. Hence, tests are of most significance when made .
just prior to planting or during crop growth. A negative test at such
time indicates the desirability of applying manganese’. Twenty-five pounds
of commercial manganese sulfate per acre is usually adequate to correct
any possible deficiency. Soluble manganese occurs under conditions of
poor aeration and drainage and may be present in toxic amounts for
some plants.
It is doubtful that manganese is needed if any positive test whatsoever
is developed. Medium or moderately low tests are of little significance’,
except as indicating no manganese deficiency. High or very high tests
are undesirable on all acid soils, and indicate a need for lime. It is very
unusual to find high tests on soils which are neutral or alkaline. How-
ever, it is not likely that the crop will develop manganese toxicity, ex-
cept at the more acid soil reactions, even though the test is high.
Iron Test °
Iron is an abundant constituent of all soils, existing in the form of
iron oxides and many complex mineral combinations. Normally only :
very small amounts of iron are in an active form in the ferric state of
oxidation. Under conditions of high acidity larger amounts are found,
and under poor drainage conditions, especially in the presence of organic
matter, active ferrous iron compounds are developed. Soluble ferrous salts
are harmful to plant growth and contribute to the infertility of poorly
aerated soils.
The presence of very low, yet definite amounts of active iron, as re-
vealed by the test, is desirable for all crops. Higher amounts, on well
drained soils, may not be injurious to crops capable of growing under
strongly acid conditions. Abnormally high iron tests on poorly drained
soils indicate an unfavorable condition of soil aeration.
Negative iron tests may occasionally result on heavily limed soils of
excessive sandiness. In such cases, a chlorotic condition of the leaves may
develop, which is controlled by spraying the plants with iron salts. Only
one case of this sort has been encountered in this State.
Indication of Other Tests —
Occasionally soils which produce poor crops contain unusual or harm-
ful concentrations of other chemical constituents. The presence of sea .
water or white alkali salts is indicated by chloride, sodium and sulfate
tests. Soluble carbonates and high sodium tests indicate black alkali ac-
cumulations. High tests for zinc, lead, copper, mercury and arsenic sug-
1 Not necessarily for tobacco,

. Morgan Soil Testing System 55
gest development of injurious amounts of these elements as a result of
soil contamination by industrial plants, or as residues from soil treat-
ments to control plant diseases or insects. The boron test may be applied
when crops are suspected of boron deficiency, and if a positive test is
not obtained, a more accurate laboratory test for boron may be made.
The molybdenum test is the newest addition to the list.

56 » Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
SUMMARY JZ
The soil testing methods developed at this Station during the past
20 years have been built around the employment of a 10 per cent so-
lution of sodium acetate in 3 per cent acetic acid, buffered at pH 4.8, '
for the soil extraction. This has been designated, for convenience, as the
Morgan soil extracting solution. This scheme of testing, identified as
the Morgan Soil Testing System, has been found to be of great value
in chemical soil diagnosis, not only in this State, but in many sections
of the United States as well as numerous foreign countries.
The revised methods used in these tests are presented in detail. Rou-
tine tests, of general application, are as follows: nitrate and ammonia
nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, aluminum and man-
ganese. Special tests provide indications relative to the following constit-
uents: iron (both ferric and ferrous), sulfates, nitrites, sodium, chlorides,
carbonates, boron, zinc, copper, mercury, lead, arsenic and molybdenum.
The adaptations of the tests to plant tissue testing, the examination
of drainage and irrigation waters and other dilute aqueous solutions, and
the testing of saline and alkali soils are also presented. °
Considerations involved in the practical interpretation of the tests un-
der various conditions are discussed at length.
Details of pH testing are also included. The significance of soil re- ;
action with respect to lime requirement, and the interpretation of quick
chemical tests is given due attention.
The modifying effects of physical soil properties and other factors lim-
iting crop growth are also stressed.
Methods such as these described in this bulletin are capable of yield-
ing valuable information concerning the chemical characteristics of the
soil and are extremely helpful when interpreted by an individual com-
petent to offer sound advice in soil management practices.
*

“ Morgan Soil Testing System 57
REFERENCES

1. AMERICAN SOCIETY OF AGRONOMY AND NATIONAL FERTILIZER AssociaTION. Hunger
Signs in Crops. Judd and Detweiler. Washington, D.C. 1949,

2. Bercer, K.C., anp Truoc, E. Boron determinations in soils and plants. Ind. and
Eng. Chem. Analyt. Ed. 11:540-545. 1939.

3. Bouyoucos, G. J. A comparison between the pipette method and the hydrometer
method for making mechanical analyses of soils. Soil Sci. 38:335-343. 1934.

4. ecstestssstestssseeeeeeee The high degree of accuracy of the improved soil hydro-
meter used in the mechanical analysis of soils. Soil Sci. 44:315-317. 1937.

5. Bray, R. H. Nitrate tests for soils and plant tissues. Soil Sci. 60:219-221. 1945.

6. Carotus, R. L. The use of rapid chemical plant nutrient tests in fertilizer de-
ficiency diagnosis and vegetable crop research. Va. Truck Expt. Sta. Bul. 98. 1938.

7. Corwett, J. K., anp Parker, A. E. The logwood test for aluminum. British
Food Jour. 2:346-347. 1900.

8. ConstTaBLe, E. W., anp Mites, I. E. Soil testing methods and apparatus designed
for economy in time and labor. Jour. Amer. Soc. Agron. 33:623-631. 1941.

9. Coox, R. L., Ropertson, L. S., Lawton, K., AND Roop, P. J. Green tissue testing
with the Spurway soil testing equipment as an aid in soil fertility studies. Soil
Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 12:379-381. 1948.

10, cecessesesesesseeeeeee AND Mitrar, C. E. Plant nutrient deficiencies. Mich. Agr. Expt.
Sta. Spec. Bul. 353. 1949.

11. Emmert, E. M. Plant tissue tests as a guide to fertilizer treatment of tomatoes.
Ky. Agr. Expt. Sta. Bul. 430. 1942.

12. Ferct, F. The application of diphenyl derivatives to qualitative reactions. Chem.
Ztg. 44:689-690. 1920. (Chem. Abst. 15:217-218).

13. wees Qualitative analyse mit Hilfe von Tiipfelreaktionen. Akad. Ver. Ges.
Leipzig. 1930.

14. wuss Qualitative Analysis by Spot Tests. Nordeman Publ. Co. New York.
1939.

15. w.ssseeee Qualitative Analysis by Spot Tests. 3rd ed. Elsevier Publ. Co., Inc.
New York. 1946.

16. assesses AND NeusBer, F. The detection of elements of the hydrogen sulfide
group, with particular regard to spot reactions. Z. Analyt. Chem. 62:369-384. 1923.
(Chem. Abst. 17:2687).

17. Fiscner, H. Microchemical detection of certain heavy metals by drop tests with
dithizone. Mikrochemie 2:319-329.. 1930. (Chem. Abst. 25:893).

5

58 Conneciicut Experiment Station Bulletin 541

18. Goss, D. M., anp Owens, A. J. Different soil test methods applied to soils of
known. fertilizer treatments. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 2:151-166. 1937.

19. Hester, J. B., AnD SHeLTon, F. A. The employment of soil chemistry in the indus-

+ trial production of maximum crop yields. Campbell Soup Co., Dept. of Agr. Res.

Res. Monograph 2. 1946.

20. creseseseseseseerssesssesesrseserssseeneees Know your plant and soil requirements. Camp-
bell Soup Co., Dept. of Agr. Res. Res.,Monograph 3. 1949.

21. Hosxinc, J. S. The determinat.on of cobalt, nickel, copper and zinc in soil ex-
tracts. Jour. and Proc. Austral. Chem. Inst., 172-183. 1936.

22. Karraker, P. E. Productive soil. Univ. Ky. Agr. Ext. Div. Circ. 468. 1949.

23. Kinc, A. V. A method for the determination of soluble copper in soils. Jour.
Amer. Soc. Agron. 39:610-614. 1947.

24. KuircHen, H. B., et al. Diagnostic techniques for soils and crops. The American
Potash Institute, Washington, D.C. 1948.

25. Krumuorz, P., anp SaucHEz, J. V. Determination of zinc by induced precipita-
tion. Mikrochemie 15:114-118. 1934.

26. Merxktz, F. G. Soil testing: operation, interpretation and application. Pa. Agr.
Expt. Sta. Bul. 398. 1940.

27. MIKKELSEN, D. S., anp Toru, S. J. Thiazol yellow for determining the magnesium
content of soil extracts. Jour. Amer. Soc. Agron. 39: 165-166. 1947.

28. Mrs, I. E. Rapid tests for plant food deficiencies under southern conditions.
Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 2:143-150. 1937.

29. Mrrrar, C. E., anp Turk, L. M. Fertilizers, what they are and how to use them.
Mich. State College Spec. Bul. 183 (revised). 1945.

30. Morcan, M. F. A simple spot-plate test for nitrate nitrogen in soil or other ex-
tracts. Science 71:343-344. 1930.

31. sessssssssses esses Microchemical soil tests. Conn. Agr. Expt. Sta. Bul. 333. 1932.

32. ssssssssseseteeseeseeeee ~The Universal soil testing system. Conn. Agr. Expt. Sta. Bul. 372.
1935.

33. sssesessseseseeseseeee The Universal soil testing system (rev.). Conn. Agr. Expt. Sta. Bul.
392. 1937. ‘

34, ssessssessesssseeseeeese Chemical soil diagnosis by the Universal soil testing system. Conn.
Agr. Expt. Sta. Bul. 450. 1941.

35. Ontario Dept. or AGRICULTURE, Toronto. Soil management and fertilizer use.
Bul. 463. 1949.

36. Precn, M., anp EncuisH, L. Rapid microchemical soil tests. Soil Sci. 57:167-195.
1944,

7

Morgan Soil Testing System 59
37. Penc, C., anp Cuu, T. S. Development and use of a powdery indicator for rapid
and accurate estimation of soil reaction. Soil Sci. 57:367-369. 1944.
. 38. ScarsetH, G. D. Plant tissue testing in diagnosis of the nutrient status of grow-
ing plants. Soil Sci. 55:113-121. 1943.
. 39. SCHOLLENBERGER, C. J. Determination of soil organic matter. Soil Sci. $1:483-486,
1931.
40. Smart, J. pH and Plants. D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc. N.Y. 1946.
41. Spurway, C. H. Soil reaction (pH) preference of plants. Mich. Agr. Expt. Sta.
Spec. Bul. 306. 1941.
42. succcsscssesssesseeneseeeeee SOil Fertility Diagnosis and Control. For Field, Garden, and
Greenhouse Soils. Edwards Bros., Inc. Ann Arbor, Mich. 1948.
43. cecsssssetesseeeeseeee SOil testing: A practical system of soil fertility diagnosis. Mich.
Agr. Expt. Sta. Tech. Bul. 132. 1933. (4th Revision), 1949.
44. Tuomas, R. P., anp WittiaMs, R. C. A comparison of rapid tests with amounts
of available nutrients obtained by quantitative methods on Maryland soils. Soil Sci.
Soc. of Amer. Proc. 1:243-254. 1937.
‘
45. Txornton, S. F., Conner, S. D., AND Fraser, R. R. The use of rapid chemical
tests on soils and plants as aids in determining fertilizer needs. Purdue Univ.
Agr. Expt. Sta. Circ. 204 (revised). 1939.
46. Trurw, I. V. A new modification of the volumetric method of determining soil
organic matter by means of chromic acid. (Russian with English summary).
Pedology 5-6:36. 1931.
47. Woxr, Benyamin. Rapid determination of soluble materials in soil and plant
extracts. Ind. and Eng. Chem. Anal. Ed. 15(4):248-251. 1943.
48. Wricut, C. H. A Handbook of Physical and Chemical Methods. p. ‘131. D. Van
Nostrand Co., Inc. N.Y. 1934.
.

60 Connecticut Experiment Station Bulletin 541
APPENDIX
Procedures in Brief for the Principal Tests
For handy reference after the technics described in the text
have been mastered.
REACTION CALCIUM
(pH meter) 20-40 ml soil; add water 10 drops extract
( ny retry paste. 1 drop calcium reagent
colorimetric %
Y% tsp soil in test tube; add barium Read after 5 minutes.
sulfate, 4 ml water and 3 drops of
indicator. MAGNESIUM -
10 drops extract
EXTRACTION OF SOIL 1 drop magnesium reagent A
. . 3 drops magnesium reagent B
1 tsp sieved soil Read after 1 minute.
10 ml extracting solution (for alter-
nate procedures see text) ALUMINUM
2 drops extract
NITRATE NITROGEN 2 drops extracting solution
3 drops extract 1 drop aluminum reagent
° Fi Read after 1 minute.
2 drops brucine solution id .
7 drops sulfuric acid ep a
Read after 15 _—* MANGANESE
1 drop extract 10 drops extract
4 drops diphenylamine-sulfuric acid 2 drops manganese reagent A
Read after 2 minutes. 1 drop manganese reagent B
Read immediately, one test at a
time.
AMMONIA NITROGEN
4 drops extract FERROUS AND FERRIC IRON
2 drops omg reagent 10 drops extract
Read after 1 minute. 3 drops iron reagent A
1 drop iron reagent B
PHOSPHORUS Read after 2 minutes.
10 drops extract FERRIC IRON
1 drop phosphorus reagent A
2 drops phosphorus reagent B 10 drops extract
Read after 1 minute. 3 drops iron reagent A
1 dfop iron reagent C
Read after 2 minutes.
POTASSIUM
10 drops extract FERROUS IRON
1 drop potassium reagent A 10 drops extract
10 drops potassium reagent B 2 drops iron reagent A
Let stand 1 minute before shaking. 1 drop iron reagent D
Read after 2 minutes. Read after 2 minutes.

Color and Turbidity Charts

THE MORGAN

SOIL TESTING SYSTEM

Appendix, Bulletin 541
iz’ i
WAS Lost
See

THE CONNECTICUT AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION @ NEW HAVEN

PLATE [.
NITRATE NITROGEN COLOR CHART
Morgan Soil Testing System
APPROX. RELATIVE
PPM IN TEST .
RATING SOIL * INDEX
Medium High = 2s :
°* Test made on 3 drops of undiluted extract. If
diluted before testing, multiply by appropriate factor.
°° Probably toxic. This rating has been added in this
reprinting.

, PLATE II.
a
AMMONIA NITROGEN COLOR CHART
Morgan Soil Testing System
APPROX. RELATIVE
PPM IN TEST
RATING SOIL * INDEX
«
Medium High «806 Peas
reine eRe
°* Test made on 4 drops of undiluted extract. If
diluted before testing, multiply by appropriate factor.
> °° Toxic. This rating has been added in this reprinting.

PLATE II.
PHOSPHORUS COLOR CHART
Morgan Soil Testing System
APPROX, RELATIVE
PPM IN TEST
RATING soit * INDEX
Medium 25 4
Low 12 2
* Test made on 10 drops of undiluted soil extract. If
diluted before testing, multiply by appropriate factor.

PLATE IV.
POTASSIUM AND CALCIUM READING CHART
Morgan Soil Testing System
POTASSIUM _ CALCIUM
APPROX. RELATIVE APPROX. RELATIVE
PPM IN INDEX PPM IN TEST
RATING SOIL * TEST RATING SOIL * INDEX
PERE SRG IIE 2S AG
Pe tts ears in sa haere
Medium 180 6 moe « ledium 1200 6
High High
Medium 120 4 Medium 900 4
Low 60 2 Low 500 2
° Test made on 10 drops of undiluted soil extract. If
diluted before testing, multiply by appropriate factor.

PLATE V.
MAGNESIUM COLOR CHART
Morgan Soil Testing System
APPROX. RELATIVE
PPM IN TEST
RATING SOIL * INDEX
Medium High 50 6 Ef
° Test made on 10 drops of undiluted soil extract. If
diluted before testing, multiply by appropriate factor.

; PLATE VI.
,
“i

ALUMINUM COLOR CHART

Morgan Soil Testing System

APPROX. RELATIVE

PPM IN TEST
| RATING SOIL * INDEX
High 125 8
>
, ° Test made on 2 drops of undiluted soil extract. If
; diluted before testing, multiply by appropriate factor.

4
PLATE VII.
2
P . MANGANESE COLOR CHART
Morgan Soil Testing System
APPROX. RELATIVE ;
PPM IN TEST
; RATING SOIL * INDEX
:
| me
Medium High 25 6
tt dapiesicekt
: nse a ar aed
a ars
* Test made on 10 drops of undiluted soil extract. If
diluted before testing, multiply by appropriate factor.
i | pee - bi

